Germany as a business location: 
selected aspects of current dependencies 
and medium- term challenges
The German economy is under considerable pressure to adapt. Demographic change is weighing 
on prospects for growth and intensifying competition for skilled workers. In foreign trade, there 
are significant dependencies on China. A sudden break with China would likely bring about far- 
reaching disruptions to supply chains and production in the short term. In order to reduce 
dependence on imported fossil fuels and to supply low- emission energy at reasonable costs, it 
will be vital to expand the supply of renewable energy and to lower energy demand by increasing 
efficiency. Digitalisation may provide opportunities that could significantly boost growth. What is 
crucial here is not only the production of digital goods, but also the diffusion of these products 
in the form of intermediate inputs to other areas.
Overall, the German economy still appears to be in a good position. Thus far, demographic 
change has been counteracted by employing immigrants, amongst other measures. German 
enterprises continue to make great use of the opportunities offered by international markets. All 
in all, industry has been able to mitigate the direct energy price shock fairly well due to its good 
profitability and financing as well as temporary government assistance measures. Despite coming 
under numerous strains, the price and cost competitiveness of the economy remains quite favour -
able on average. Differences between sectors are likely to be considerable, though.
Nevertheless, there is broad- based pressure to take action. The problems that must be overcome 
are complex and, in some cases, intertwined. For example, the supply of energy must be ensured 
and international dependencies need to be reduced. At the same time, in order to achieve climate 
targets, it is likely that substantial imports of storable energy sources and certain raw materials 
will still be needed. For the foreseeable future, transformation processes such as digitalisation 
and decarbonisation will require a large supply of skilled workers, which is diminishing due to 
demographic change. Amidst all of this, the scale and speed of the necessary structural change 
are not easy to gauge.
Central, state and local levels of government can contribute to the attractiveness of Germany as 
a business location by creating suitable framework conditions. These include the ability to plan 
ahead in the area of energy supply, such as through consistent and predictable climate policy. 
Transformative processes such as decarbonisation and digitalisation will be all the more manage -
able if the education system provides students with the right key skills and, above all, the ability 
to adapt to structural change. Greater diversification of suppliers in international trade – for 
example through regional free trade agreements – would reduce the risk of excessive dependen -
cies on China. Improving the integration of immigrants into the labour market as well as increas -
ing the efficiency of government administration and approval processes would likewise make 
Germany more attractive as a business location. Policymakers are currently taking some steps in 
this direction. However, these must also be implemented and pursued.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
15
Deindustrialisation 
in Germany?
For some time now, doubts have been raised 
concerning Germany’s “business model” and 
its prospects for the future. The discussion has 
intensified in recent months in light of Russia’s 
war of aggression against Ukraine and other 
geopolitical turmoil. Germany’s business model 
is said to revolve around a relatively strong 
industry- based economy supported by cheap 
Russian gas. By all accounts, the success of for -
eign trade is linked to pronounced supply chain 
dependencies on “problematic” states and the 
persistently high need for skilled workers is met 
through immigration. This orientation of the 
German economy is thought to be unsustain -
able. As a consequence of Russia’s war against 
Ukraine, energy costs rose massively. It is ar -
gued that it will become more difficult to cover 
Germany’s labour shortage through immigra -
tion, partly because demographic change is im -
pacting some neighbouring countries to even 
greater degrees. The stability of cross- border 
supply chains appears to be under threat due 
to the prevailing geopolitical tensions. It is for 
these reasons that Germany’s business model is 
reportedly in danger. Without further – and, in 
some cases, substantial  – economic policy 
intervention, Germany would be at risk of dein -
dustrialisation.
The energy supply, international dependencies 
and demographic change are undoubtedly 
major challenges facing the German economy. 
An assessment of these challenges should 
begin by taking stock of the German econo -
my’s critical dependencies. On this basis, it will 
be easier to evaluate how much action is 
needed. In this context, it must be kept in mind 
that Germany’s business model is not a result 
of government planning and design. The struc -
tures of economies arise from complex market- 
based processes within a government frame -
work. Here, enterprises are constantly adapting 
to a changing market environment, and appro -
priate government framework conditions can 
make this easier.The significance of industry 
to the German economy
Industry has a special status in Germany.1 Last 
year, the manufacturing sector accounted for 
18% of gross domestic product (GDP) and 16% 
of employment; these figures are significantly 
higher than in most other advanced econ -
omies. It is also noteworthy that German indus -
try’s share of value added remained stable from 
the 1990s up until the COVID-  19 pandemic. 
Like in other advanced economies, it saw a 
marked decline during the pandemic. The shift 
in value added and employment towards the 
services sector has been slower than in other 
countries and can be explained, in part, by the 
comparatively high productivity gains in Ger -
man industry.2 Nevertheless, in Germany, as in 
other advanced economies, the largest share of 
value added by far is attributable to the services 
sector, standing at around 60%. A certain con -
vergence in the size of the German industrial 
sector to the proportions seen in other ad -
vanced economies would not be cause for con -
cern, per se, especially if it were to occur grad -
ually.
In aggregate terms, productivity growth in Ger -
many since the 1990s has not been systematic -
ally higher or lower than in economies in which 
the shift towards the services sector progressed 
more rapidly. The digital transformation has 
been one contributing factor in this. Sectors of 
the economy that produce predominantly 
digital goods have recorded above- average 
growth in productivity over recent decades and 
have thus been key drivers of aggregate prod -Germany’s 
“business 
model” in 
danger ?
Major chal -
lenges posed by 
energy crisis, 
international 
dependencies 
and demo -
graphic changeHigh significance 
of industry in 
Germany
Efficiency gains 
through digital 
transformation, 
but with dimin -
ishing effect 
over time
1 In this article, the term “industry” refers to the manufac -
turing sector in Germany. The remaining areas of the pro -
duction sector are not the main focus here, as they include, 
for example, energy companies, some segments that only 
account for small shares of value added in GDP (such as 
mining) and segments that are oriented towards the do -
mestic economy (such as construction).
2 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
16
uctivity growth.3 Bundesbank analyses show 
that, alongside investment in digital goods, 
digital intermediate inputs that feed into a 
wide variety of goods via production linkages 
were also significant in this context.4 However, 
much like in other advanced economies, the 
effi ciency gains resulting from digitalisation 
have tended to diminish over time.5
Evidence from a survey conducted by the 
Bundesbank in 2022 suggests that digitalisa -
tion has seen a boost in some parts of the cor -
porate sector since the pandemic.6 However, it 
remains to be seen how persistent this boost 
and the associated changes in enterprises’ 
work processes will be. To enhance productiv -
ity growth in the future, it will be crucial to bet -
ter exploit the potential offered by the digital 
transformation. In this context, changes in in -
stitutional conditions to create an efficient 
digital infrastructure could bring about signifi -
cant incentive effects.
The present debate surrounding the state of 
German industry should, however, be viewed 
against the backdrop of the far- reaching, con -
current challenges posed by decarbonisation, 
the demographic transition and changes in the 
international environment. Moreover, if digitali -
sation is to succeed, significant further adjust -
ments need to be made in the corporate sec -
tor. The challenges to industry arising from po -
tentially disruptive changes in these four areas 
cannot be denied.
International linkages of the 
German economy
While some of these developments are only 
recent , most have longer histories. The German 
economy has been confronted with a changing 
global economic environment for some time 
now. Following the global financial and eco -
nomic crisis, world trade lost significant mo -
mentum after having grown strongly for 30 
years. The driving force behind this weakness in 
world trade was not just the slowdown in global economic growth. Besides this, the 
share of world trade in global GDP did not in -
crease further. This is, in part, a reflection of the 
rising significance of emerging market econ -
omies; for these countries, GDP growth was 
less trade- intensive.7 In addition, the tailwinds Sustainable 
boost to digitali -
sation requires 
improved institu -
tional conditions
Challenges 
cannot  be 
denied
World trade lost 
momentum 
after global 
financial and 
economic crisisGross value added in the manufacturing 
sector in relation to GDP*
510152025
1995 00 05 10 15 20 22
Sources: World Bank and Bureau of Economic Analysis. * Data 
between 1995, 2008, 2019 and 2021 / 2022 are interpolated 
linearly.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Germany
FranceUnited StatesUnited Kingdom
ItalyJapan
Employment in the manufacturing sector 
in relation to total employment*
510152025
1995 00 05 10 15 20 22
Source:  National  data.  * Data  between  1995/1997,  2008, 
2019 and 2022 are interpolated linearly.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Germany
FranceUnited States
ItalyJapanUnited Kingdom
3 The digital sectors typically comprise segments of the 
manufacturing sector (manufacture of computer, electronic 
and optical products; manufacture of electrical equipment) 
as well as parts of the services sector (information and com -
munication). For more information, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2023a).
4 A detailed description of the model used can be found in 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a).
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
17
for trade provided by falling costs for informa -
tion, communication and transport are likely to 
have diminished.8 Furthermore, protectionist 
movements have also slowed down inter -
national trade. These were especially apparent 
in the trade dispute between the United States 
and China. However, tariffs and non- tariff bar -
riers to trade have been on the rise in other 
parts of the world, too. According to the Global 
Trade Alert database, the number of new 
measures worldwide restricting trade has 
reached new highs in recent years.9
In Germany, too, foreign trade linkages de -
veloped more slowly following their recovery from the global financial and economic crisis of 
2008-09.10 In fact, like in other advanced econ -
omies, integration in global value chains de -
clined slightly. Nevertheless, Germany’s degree 
of openness continued to exceed those of 
other major advanced economies in North 
America, Europe, and Asia by far, with the gap 
even widening further in some cases. This 
means that German enterprises have been 
making greater use of the opportunities arising 
on international markets in the recent past. 
This applies to both sales prospects in foreign 
markets as well as opportunities for the pur -
chase of foreign- manufactured goods or for 
offshore production.
Closely intertwined cross-border linkages also 
harbour risks and dependencies, however. This 
was clearly demonstrated by the supply chain 
disruptions resulting from the COVID-  19 pan -
demic and Russia’s war of aggression against 
Ukraine. The geoeconomic tensions between 
China and the West have also highlighted the 
risks arising from those dependencies. A signifi -
cant part of the strong growth in German ex -
ports and an even larger part of the growth in 
imports over the past two decades have been 
attributable to China.
China is an important sales market for individ -
ual categories of goods, especially for motor 
vehicles and machinery. It also plays an import -
ant, but not exceptional, role for the goods ex -
ported by the German economy as whole.11 
The same picture emerges even if the share of 
German value added consumed in China is ap -
proximated using input- output tables. Less Foreign trade 
ratio in Germany 
significantly 
higher than in 
other advanced 
economies
China is one of 
many customers 
of German 
industry …Global trade in relation to global 
economic output
14161820222426%
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20 22
Sources: IMF, World Bank and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank1995: Establish-
ment of WTO2001: China's 
accession 
to WTO
2020: Outbreak of
COVID-19 pandemic
2009: Global
financial and
economic crisis
Number of new trade policy measures* 
worldwide
Source: Global Trade Alert. * Affecting trade in goods or ser-
vices. Data excluding late reports for the respective reporting 
year (the cut-off date is 31 December of each year).
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 2205001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000Trade restrictions
Trade liberalisation
8 See Antràs (2020).
9 Global Trade Alert ( https://www.globaltradealert.org ) is 
an initiative that was launched by the Centre for Economic 
Policy Research (CEPR). See also Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020).
10 The slowdown in the pace of globalisation played a role 
in this. The sharp rise in the foreign trade ratio in 2022 was 
mainly attributable to the considerable increases in the 
prices of import and export goods.
11 In 2022, around 7% of Germany’s total goods exports 
were destined for China. China was thus the fourth most 
important destination country for German exports.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
18
than 3% of German value added depends on 
final demand in China.12
From the perspective of goods imports, how -
ever, China has much greater significance. The 
goods for which China accounts for a large 
proportion of deliveries in terms of value in -
clude certain intermediate inputs (such as bat -
teries and electronic components) as well as 
final products from the capital goods sector 
(computer and telecommunications equip -
ment). In addition, sizeable shares of various 
final products from the consumer goods sector 
(e.g. consumer electronics and electrical house -
hold appliances) come from China. Chinese 
intermediate inputs constitute a significant 
share of imported intermediate inputs, particu -
larly in the production of computer, electronic 
and optical products as well as electrical equip -
ment. Other segments of the manufacturing 
sector, such as construction and machinery, 
also use sizeable shares of intermediate inputs 
from China.
Whilst other imports of raw materials and inter -
mediate inputs from China are low in terms of 
value, they are often difficult to replace with 
imports from other countries.13 According to a 
survey conducted by the Bundesbank, many 
German firms make use of critical intermediate 
inputs from China in their production pro -
cesses; the options for replacing these goods 
are often limited (for more information on de -
pendence on China, see the box on pp. 21f.). 
This applies, in particular, to the manufacturing 
sector. German firms have already taken meas -
ures to reduce their strong focus on China with 
regard to their sourcing of critical intermediate 
inputs. In many cases, however – especially for 
intermediate inputs considered “very difficult” 
to replace – no efforts have yet been made to 
reduce dependencies on China. A sudden break … but is more 
important as a 
supplier in some 
cases …
… especially 
for some inter -
mediate inputs 
that would be 
difficult to 
replaceForeign trade ratios* of selected 
advanced economies
102030405060708090100
1991 95 00 05 10 15 20 22
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Cabinet Office of Japan, 
Eurostat, Office for National Statistics, Federal Statistical Office 
and Bundesbank calculations. * Sum of nominal exports and 
imports  (goods  and  services)  in  relation  to  gross  domestic 
product.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Germany
FranceItaly
United Kingdom
United StatesJapan
Participation in global value added 
chains of selected advanced economies*
253035404550
1995 00 05 10 15 20
Sources: OECD (2023) TiVA database and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.  * Sum  of  foreign  value  added  content  in  a  country's  
gross exports and its value added content in foreign gross ex-
ports in relation to said country's gross exports.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
Germany
FranceItaly
United Kingdom
United StatesJapan
12 These calculations are based on the OECD Inter- Country 
Input- Output Tables (version 2022) for 2020.
13 According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), 
China produces 60% of the world’s rare earth elements. In 
addition, the refining of rare earth elements (90%), lithium, 
and cobalt (between 60% and 70% each) was also con -
centrated in China. See International Energy Agency (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
19
with China would likely bring about far-  
reaching disruptions to supply chains and pro -
duction in Germany, at least in the short term.14
According to the stock figures from the foreign 
direct investment statistics collected by the 
Bundesbank, the foreign direct investment 
stock of German enterprises is distributed 
widely around the world. As a location for Ger -
man foreign direct investment, China was in 
third place behind the United States and Lux -
embourg, which is an important holding loca -
tion. All the same, China’s share of German 
foreign direct investment only amounted to 
just under 6% in 2021. By comparison, turn -
over and income from foreign direct invest -
ment in China are high. According to the most 
recent figures, Chinese affiliates of German cor -
porate groups generated turnover of €382 bil -
lion and profits of €23 billion. This means that 
22% of Germany’s global turnover and 15% of 
Germany’s global investment income were 
generated from foreign direct investment in 
China.15
In the past, German corporate groups bene -
fited greatly from internationalisation via for -
eign direct investment and increased their 
international competitiveness in this way.16 Al-
though the level of foreign direct investment in 
China is relatively low at present, China’s share 
in Germany’s total foreign direct investment 
has doubled since 2010. This is a reflection of 
China’s robust and, in global terms, compara -
tively strong growth. China plays a prominent 
role in the automotive sector, in particular, ac -
counting for 29% of German foreign direct in -
vestment. However, China is also a major loca -
tion for investment in the manufacture of ma -
chinery and equipment (13%) as well as the High turnover 
and investment 
income from 
foreign direct 
investment in 
China
Increasing 
importance of 
China for for -
eign direct 
investmentImportance of intermediate inputs from 
China for German output
Sources: OECD (2021) ICIO database and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 5 10 15 20%
Imports TotalChinese intermediate inputs as a share of imported 
and total inputs used in each economic sector:
Manufacture of 
basic metalsMotor vehicles and partsChemicals and 
chemical productsPharmaceutical productsRubber and 
plastics productsTotal manufacturingFabricated metal 
products
All 
economic sectorsOther transport 
equipmentMachinery and equipmentConstructionTextiles, wearing apparel, 
leather and related
productsElectrical equipmentComputer, electronic
and optical products
German foreign direct investment in 
important regions by individual sector*
€ billion, 2021
0 10 20 30 40 50
* Broken down by the sector of the German parent companies. 
1 For China and Asia (excluding China), data were available on-
ly up to the end of 2019.
Deutsche BundesbankManufacture of
machinery and
equipmentManufacture of 
chemicals and 
chemical products1Manufacture of 
motor vehicles
and partsChina USA EU Asia (excl. China)
14 This would particularly affect the production of goods 
in which critical intermediate inputs play a role. Over the 
longer term, however, it is likely that part of the intermedi -
ate inputs from China could be replaced with intermediate 
inputs produced in Germany or other countries, which 
would mitigate losses.
15 For 2021, the data is on turnover. For 2022, the data is 
on investment income.
16 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
20
The signifi  cance of China as a supplier of critical 
intermediate  inputs to German fi  rms
The past few years have highlighted the 
risks to economic development arising from 
signifi  cant unilateral dependence on inter-
mediate inputs from abroad. The COVID- 19 
pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression 
against Ukraine led to disruptions in supply 
chains. More recently, the geopolitical and 
economic tensions between China and the 
West have made China the focus of eco-
nomic policy discussion. This is because 
there was no other country from which 
German fi  rms imported more in 2022, and 
this included numerous intermediate inputs. 
The dependence on China is not simply ap-
parent from aggregate trade data, as this 
perspective underestimates existing de-
pendencies on the import side. Even inter-
mediate inputs with low shares of value in 
the total intermediate inputs used can be 
essential for production processes and may 
be diffi   cult to source from other countries. 
These include, for example, commodities 
such as rare earths as well as lithium and 
cobalt, for which production and further 
processing is globally dominated by China.1
The assessment of the Bundesbank Online 
Panel – Firms (BOP- F) survey for the months 
of April to June 2023 paints a more detailed 
picture. It also provides information on the 
scope available to German fi  rms for redu-
cing their dependence on intermediate in-
puts sourced from China.
In the period covered by the survey, 29% of 
fi  rms in Germany sourced critical intermedi-
ate inputs from China. “Critical intermedi-
ate inputs” are goods or services without 
which a relevant portion of a fi  rm’s produc-
tion processes or business activities would 
cease or only be possible with considerable 
delays or at greatly reduced standards of quality.2 It is noteworthy that the majority 
of these fi  rms source critical intermediate 
inputs via domestic or foreign intermediar-
ies. Many of the fi  rms that rely on Chinese 
intermediate inputs therefore do not main-
tain direct import relations with China, but 
are nevertheless highly dependent on Chi-
nese intermediate inputs.
According to the BOP- F survey, almost one- 
half of fi  rms in the manufacturing sector 
rely on Chinese intermediate products for 
their production processes.3 Furthermore, 
these fi  rms largely assess the possibilities for 
replacing critical intermediate inputs from 
China with products from other countries 
to be limited. Among the industrial fi  rms 
that are dependent on China, 80% reported 
that it would be “diffi   cult” or “very diffi   cult” 
to source replacement products from other 
countries. According to the survey, fi  rms 
with higher turnover are especially depend-
ent on intermediate inputs from China and 
have little scope for sourcing substitutes. 
Overall, fi  rms that source critical intermedi-
ate inputs from China and consider the pos-
sibilities of sourcing substitutes to be “very 
diffi   cult” generated just under one- quarter 
of the turnover of the German manufactur-
ing sector in 2022.4 In the short to medium 
1 See International Energy Agency (2023).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d).
3 This is consistent with a survey conducted by the ifo 
Institute, which found that 46% of fi  rms in the manu-
facturing sector are dependent on critical intermediate 
inputs from China. See Baur and Flach (2022). Accord-
ing to the BOP- F survey, other sectors also source crit-
ical intermediate inputs from China. This applies, in 
particular, to wholesale and retail trade, as well as to 
construction and the information and communication 
services sector.
4 If industrial fi  rms that consider the possibility of re-
placing intermediate inputs from China to be “diffi   cult” 
were also included here, the share of turnover would 
increase to 57%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
21
term, the economic damage caused by an 
abrupt break in trade relations with China 
could thus be considerable.
Among the industrial fi  rms that imported 
critical intermediate inputs from China in 
2022 or 2023, just over two- fi  fths have al-
ready taken measures to reduce their de-
pendence. In this context, these fi  rms are 
mainly turning to imports of intermediate 
inputs from the European Union (18%), but 
some are also sourcing inputs from non- EU 
countries (8%) or domestically (7%). A fur-
ther 16% of these fi  rms are considering 
such measures for the near future.
However, more than two- fi  fths of fi  rms that 
are dependent on China have taken no ac-
tion so far. Within this group, the propor-
tion of fi  rms that consider substituting Chi-
nese intermediate inputs to be “very diffi   -
cult” is remarkably large. Accordingly, redu-
cing dependence on China is still pending in many cases, especially for intermediate 
products considered “very diffi   cult” to re-
place. Although some fi  rms have already 
taken steps towards reducing their depend-
ence on China, it may take some time to 
develop new supply capacities in other re-
gions of the world and to build up new 
supplier relationships.5
5 According to estimates from the International Energy 
Agency, in the past, projects aimed at developing new 
mining capacity for critical minerals took an average of 
16 years from discovery to fi  rst production. See Inter-
national Energy Agency (2021).Measures to reduce critical sourcing 
exposure from China in the 
manufacturing sector*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Bundesbank Online 
Panel Firms (BOP-F) survey conducted in Q2 2023. * Weighted 
results  based  on  853  firms  from  the  manufacturing  sector. 
BOP-F question: “Has your enterprise undertaken or is your en-
terprise currently undertaking measures to reduce purchases of 
Chinese intermediate inputs?”
Deutsche Bundesbank0 10 20 30 40%
None
Other measuresSourcing from
non-EU countriesSourcing from other
EU countriesDomestic sourcingNone yet, but con-
sidering by end-2024Difficult Very difficult Easy or very easyEase or difficulty of replacement:Ease or difficulty of replacing critical 
intermediate inputs from China*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Bundesbank Online 
Panel - Firms (BOP-F) survey conducted Q2 2023. * Weighted 
results based on the number of firms in each economic sector 
(shown in parentheses). BOP-F question: “Imagine a scenario in 
which intermediate inputs from China were suddenly no longer 
available. In such a scenario, how easy or difficult would it be 
for your enterprise to replace the missing products with inter-
mediate inputs from other countries?”
Deutsche Bundesbank0 20 40 60 80 100%
All economic 
sectors (2,341)
Manufacturing
(853)ICT (156)Retail/
Wholesale (437)Construction (248)Other business-
related services 
(153)Very difficult Difficult Easy or
very easyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
22
manufacture of chemicals and chemical prod -
ucts (8%). In this case, German enterprises pri -
marily use their Chinese affiliates to ensure 
their supplies of critical intermediate inputs or 
to gain access to the Chinese sales market.
In light of the rising geopolitical tensions and 
the risks that these bring, it may make sense 
for enterprises and policymakers to rethink the 
established structure of supply chains and fur -
ther expansion of foreign direct investment in 
China. Above all, this would mean adjusting 
the balance between efficiency and resilience 
to take account of the changed environment. 
Greater diversification of supply sources and 
adjusted inventory management could reduce 
risks.17 Focusing more on resilience can also be 
justified from an efficiency standpoint. This is 
especially true in cases where enterprises, up 
until now, have not taken sufficient consider -
ation of the economic and political risks that 
arise from international value chains.18 Further -
more, current policy initiatives aim to ensure 
that enterprises orient their supply chains more 
strongly toward countries that are systemically 
closer to their own. Other measures, such as 
the US Inflation Reduction Act, even intend to 
relocate production sites to domestic locations, 
at least for strategically important goods. There 
are corresponding plans at the EU level, too, 
such as the European Chips Act, the European 
Critical Raw Materials Act, and the EU- funded 
Important Projects of Common European Inter -
est, which include projects in the area of bat -
tery cell production.19
Direct government intervention in international 
trade should fundamentally be restricted to es -
tablishing the general framework. This is be -
cause restrictions on international trade are 
usually accompanied by welfare losses, which, 
depending on the significance of the trading 
partner in question, can be considerable.20 By 
contrast, regional free trade agreements make 
it easier for enterprises to diversify their trading 
partners.21 In this way, businesses can reduce 
their dependencies on the policies of individual states and thus lower the risk of far- reaching 
disruptions to their supply chains.Diversification of 
trading partners 
essential for sta -
bility of supply 
chains
Free trade 
agreements use -
ful instruments 
in this regardShare of German foreign direct 
investment in important regions
0102030405060
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
1 Up to 2019 including the United Kingdom, from 2020 ex-
cluding the United Kingdom.
Deutsche Bundesbank%
ChinaUnited States European Union1
Asia (excluding China)
17 According to business surveys, some firms are examin -
ing ways to make their supply chains more resilient, for 
example by diversifying their sources of supply or by in -
creasing their inventories. See Aksoy et al. (2022) and Ger -
man Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2021).
18 This is the case, for example, if enterprises take account 
only of their own risk and not that of their suppliers, which 
are themselves reliant on other suppliers, or if short- term 
profits are considered more important than medium- term 
resilience due to performance- based remuneration. It is 
also possible that risks are being reassessed based on re -
cent experiences with supply chain disruptions. A partial 
restructuring of value chains could therefore also be justi -
fied from an efficiency standpoint.
19 For more information on the European Chips Act, see 
European Commission (2022); for more information on the 
European Critical Raw Materials Act, see European Com -
mission (2023a); and for more information on the Import -
ant Projects of Common European Interest in the produc -
tion of battery cells, see European Commission (2019).
20 See Dorn et al. (2022), Felbermayr et al. (2023) and 
Fuest et al. (2022).
21 The Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 
(CETA) between the European Union and Canada has been 
applied provisionally since 2017, as ratification is still pend -
ing in some EU Member States. The EU-  Mercosur Associ -
ation Agreement is still awaiting formal legal review before 
the process of approval and ratification by the European 
Union and its Member States can begin. There are also, 
amongst others, ongoing negotiations between the Euro -
pean Union and the ASEAN countries as well as Australia. 
Negotiations between the European Union and India had 
previously been suspended, but were resumed last year. By 
contrast, the negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and 
Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the European Union 
and the United States have been on hold since the begin -
ning of 2017 and are not being pursued further.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
23
Energy cost burden for 
German  enterprises
The second major challenge relates to the 
higher cost of energy. The decrease in Russian 
gas supplies following Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine as well as the fundamentally high level 
of uncertainty surrounding the supply of en -
ergy have led to large rises in energy prices. In 
Germany, energy prices are likely to remain 
above pre- war levels in the years to come.22 
However, rising energy costs are not only a 
consequence of the war. Measures to limit cli -
mate change may likewise be contributing to 
the higher prices of fossil fuels. This trend could 
become stronger, primarily via rising carbon 
prices, as efforts towards decarbonisation in -
tensify.
Initially, German industry was able to effectively 
cushion the energy price shock due to its fa -
vourable profitability and financing.23 Accord -
ing to Bundesbank simulation results based on 
extrapolated corporate data for various seg -
ments of the manufacturing sector, the direct 
corporate profitability losses were quite man -
ageable.24 The temporary government support 
measures introduced since the start of Russia’s 
war of aggression against Ukraine were a con -
tributing factor here. Nevertheless, there were 
more significant impairments in the particularly energy- intensive segments of the manufactur -
ing sector.25
Despite the temporary sharp rise in energy 
prices compared with major partner countries, 
Germany’s price and cost competitiveness, as 
measured by its long- term average, has re -
mained quite favourable in recent years. For a 
time, this was attributable largely to the depre -
ciation of the euro against the US dollar up 
until September 2022.26 However, in sectors Increased 
energy cost 
burden  for 
the German 
economy  …
… but quite 
manageable 
so farGermany’s price 
and cost com -
petitiveness 
remains quite 
favourable1 Inverted scale: a rise in the curve (fall in values) denotes an increase in price competitiveness. 2 Last data point: 12 September 2023.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 2390
92
94
96
98
100
102
104Average since 1975 =100, quarterly, log scale1
Indicator based on deflators of total sales 
compared with 27 advanced economiesPrice competitiveness of the German economy
2020 2021 2022 202393
94
95
96
97
98Current developments
enlarged
2
22 Current forward rates indicate that the prices for gas 
and electricity in Germany will be higher over the coming 
years than the spot prices from before the outbreak of the 
war.
23 For more information on German enterprises’ profitabil -
ity and financing in 2021 – before the energy crisis – see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b).
24 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).
25 According to the Bundesbank Online Panel – Firms 
(BOP- F) survey conducted in the first quarter of 2023, the 
share of energy costs in total production costs in the manu -
facturing sector in 2022 was, on average, less than 10%; 
for the median manufacturing firm, this share was 5%. 
However, some enterprises in the manufacturing sector are 
very energy- intensive. For the enterprises among the top 
5% of enterprises with the highest shares of energy costs, 
this share was 30% or more. In this regard, output in the 
energy- intensive industry segments dropped by around 
17% between February 2022 and July 2023, according to 
the latest data available. By contrast, overall industrial out -
put declined only by around 3% over the same period; it 
remained almost unchanged if the energy- intensive indus -
try segments are factored out of the calculation.
26 Alongside the nominal effective exchange rate, the indi -
cator for price and cost competitiveness also factors in the 
deflators of total domestic sales as well as a weighted aver -
age of the relevant trading partners.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
24
with greatly above- average shares of energy 
costs, the burdens imposed by higher energy 
prices are likely to be much more significant. 
These include the chemical industry, the paper 
industry, the production of basic metals, and 
the glass and ceramics industry. Higher energy 
prices in Germany than those abroad could 
cause price competitiveness to deteriorate in 
the future due to weaker productivity growth 
and, in some cases, higher sales prices.
According to a survey conducted by the 
Bundesbank, German enterprises –  including 
those in industry – have already taken meas -
ures to adjust to higher energy prices (see the 
box on measures against higher energy prices 
on pp. 26 ff.). On the one hand, these include 
short- term adjustments such as saving energy 
or passing on costs to customers. On the other 
hand, they are planning to increase their en -
ergy efficiency or make greater use of renew -
able energy. Relocations of production abroad 
have so far been rather rare, even in the manu -
facturing sector and its energy- intensive seg -
ments. In addition, the turnover share of the 
enterprises planning to relocate abroad has so 
far been rather small. According to the survey, 
there are no signs of broad- based deindustriali -
sation in Germany.27
Nevertheless, the surge in energy prices is ham -
pering the medium- term growth potential of 
the German economy, according to Bundes -
bank estimates.28 Based on these estimates, 
persistently higher energy prices will lead to 
losses in potential output, as enterprises – in 
the case of imperfect substitutes – tend to curb 
their energy use and their production. The 
supply- side effects of higher energy prices are 
likely to be significantly stronger than those of 
the COVID-  19 pandemic.29Energy supply during the 
transition to a low- emission 
economy
Climate change mitigation is one of the largest 
challenges facing society today. The transition 
to a less carbon- intensive economy may place 
considerable burdens on enterprises, including 
costs arising as a result of emissions pricing, in -
creased prices for emissions- intensive inter -
mediate inputs, outlays to avoid emissions and 
losses from asset repricing. The economic con -
sequences for enterprises are likely to depend 
heavily on the nature and design of the inter -
ventions as well as the characteristics of the 
sector, such as emission intensity,30 which is 
typically relatively high in energy- intensive in -
dustries and also in the energy production sec -
tor itself.
Germany’s energy supply remains heavily de -
pendent on fossil fuels, which are largely im -
ported.31 Its liquefied natural gas terminals, 
both those that have been operating since 
2022 and those that are scheduled for the next 
few years, only reduce supply risk for natural 
gas. Further steps are needed to reduce the 
country’s dependence on imported fossil en -
ergy. These are in line with Germany’s neces -
sary efforts to achieve its declared climate tar -
gets (reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 
at least 65% by 2030 compared with 1990 Adjustment to 
high energy 
costs already 
foreseeable …
… but 
impairment  of 
growth potential 
inevitable Far- reaching 
effects of 
climate  policy 
on macro-
economic 
developments 
German energy 
supply highly 
dependent on 
imported fossil 
energy, which 
would be 
reduced by 
expanding 
climate- friendly 
energy 
production 
27 In the manufacturing sector, employment subject to so -
cial security contributions has recovered only minimally 
since the end of 2021 following the adjustments made 
during the pandemic. However, there has been no indica -
tion of a reduction in employment in industry since the 
sharp rises in energy prices up to mid- 2023. Disaggregated 
sectoral data on employment subject to social security con -
tributions in the energy- intensive industry segments are 
available only for the period up to the end of 2022. These 
data likewise do not show any signs of structural shifts in 
employment. The same applies to gross value added in the 
manufacturing sector, which even grew slightly compared 
to its level at the end of 2021.
28 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b).
29 For an assessment of the damage to potential output 
brought about by the COVID-  19 pandemic, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2021c).
30 See simulations using the environmental multi- sector 
DSGE model EMuSe in Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c).
31 This is still true even though only very small amounts of 
energy were imported directly from Russia in 2023. By con -
trast, imports of liquefied natural gas increased sharply.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
25
Measures introduced or planned by German enterprises in 
response to rising energy costs
The sharp rises in energy prices since 2021 
have had a severe impact on the German 
economy, especially last year. The fact that 
German enterprises were, on average, in 
favour able fi  nancial positions helped to 
mitigate the direct impact on their profi  t-
ability and fi  nancing.1 In future, however, 
how they fare will increasingly depend on 
how they adapt to the changed conditions 
regarding the supply and costs of energy. It 
will also hinge on the extent to which rising 
energy prices weaken growth potential, 
particularly in the manufacturing sector. 
An  evaluation of the Bundesbank Online 
Panel – Firms (BOP- F) survey from the fi  rst 
quarter of 2023 provides detailed informa-
tion on the measures that German enter-
prises either have recently implemented or 
are planning for the future. This information 
is not included in conventional statistics.
In 2022, an especially large number of en-
terprises responded to rising energy costs 
by saving energy, for example on heating, 
lighting or hot water consumption. In add-
ition, when weighted by fi  rm turnover, 
more than half of the enterprises raised the 
prices for their products and services in 
2022. In doing so, many businesses passed 
on their higher energy costs –  at least in 
part – to their customers.2 Enterprises also 
took longer- term measures aimed at im-
proving their energy effi   ciency or increasing 
their use of renewable energy. In turnover- 
weighted terms, one- third of enterprises in-
vested in energy effi   ciency in 2022, com-
pared with just one- fi  fth in 2021.3 In 2022, 
a further one- quarter of fi  rms were also 
planning to make this type of investment in 
the near future. Together with the energy 
savings, this is consistent with data indicat-
ing that growth in the energy productivity of the German economy almost tripled last 
year compared with the average of previous 
years.4
By contrast, production cuts and relocations 
of production abroad were relatively rare 
overall in 2022. Just over 6% of enterprises 
–  measured in terms of their turnover  – 
scaled back their production in 2022 owing 
to high energy costs. Less than 3% of turn-
over was attributable to the enterprises that 
moved parts of their production abroad. 
However, relocations of production could 
continue to some extent in the future. This 
can be explained by the fact that enter-
prises accounting for a total share of around 
4% of turnover have been planning to 
move parts of their production abroad in 
the near future due to increased energy 
costs. This is also consistent with the fact 
that, given the rise in energy costs so far, 
4% of fi  rms – weighted by turnover – have 
been planning to step up their imports of 
energy- intensive products. Such projects 
could render parts of domestic production 
obsolete.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c).
2 An economic survey conducted by the German 
Chamber of Industry and Commerce in the autumn of 
2022 suggests that just under 60% of enterprises 
passed on high energy prices to their customers. See 
German Chamber of Industry and Commerce (2022).
3 Investments in energy effi   ciency are aimed at redu-
cing energy consumption in existing buildings (e.g. en-
ergy insulation, replacement of windows, installation 
of a ventilation system) or in technical installations 
(e.g. purchase of smart meters, energy- effi   cient IT sys-
tems, lighting systems, production facilities, cooling 
systems).
4 According to data from the Working Group on En-
ergy Balances, primary energy productivity growth 
(real GDP per gigajoule of energy used), adjusted for 
temperature effects, almost tripled last year compared 
with the average for the years 2011 to 2021. This was 
the highest growth rate in one year since 1991. See 
Working Group on Energy Balances (2023).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
26
The rise in energy prices has had the hard-
est impact on the manufacturing sector, as 
this area has the highest primary energy 
and gas consumption within the corporate 
sector.5 Accordingly, enterprises in industry 
have more frequently undertaken measures 
intended to mitigate the impact of the en-
ergy crisis compared with other sectors 
such as the construction or services sectors. 
Measured in terms of turnover, a signifi  -
cantly larger proportion of enterprises 
switched from natural gas to other fossil 
fuels in 2022 than in 2021. This is hardly 
surprising, however, as the gas consump-
tion of some large fi  rms could probably be 
replaced much more quickly with mineral 
oil or coal, for example, than with renew-
able energy. It is noteworthy that the enter-
prises in the manufacturing sector that ei-
ther had invested or were planning to in-
vest in energy effi   ciency in 2022 accounted 
for around two- thirds of turnover. Accord-
ing to the results of the BOP- F survey, the 
turnover share of the fi  rms that had 
switched or were planning to switch to re-
newable energy was also considerable, at 
60%. Based on these fi  ndings, the adjust-
ment processes in industry to high energy 
costs and away from fossil fuels are already 
clearly discernible.6 Enterprises made com-
paratively seldom use of government sup-
port measures in 2022.7
To date, relocations of production abroad 
have also been rather rare in the hard- hit 
manufacturing sector. Where mention is 
made of such plans, it is primarily by larger 
enterprises. In terms of turnover, the share 
of manufacturing enterprises that in 2022 
either had relocated parts of their produc-
tion abroad or wanted to do so in the near 
future was just over 6%.8 Based on this sur-
vey, the risk posed by relocations of produc-
tion abroad resulting from higher energy 
prices seems so far to be limited for Ger-
man industry as a whole. This also holds true for energy- intensive enterprises.9 In 
2022, of the energy- intensive enterprises in 
the manufacturing sector, around 20% had 
5 See Federal Statistical Offi   ce (2022a, 2022b).
6 The survey does not provide any information on the 
scale of investment, however.
7 Large enterprises with signifi  cant natural gas con-
sumption made most use of the support measures. 
However, owing to the price brakes introduced at the 
start of 2023 and the extension of existing relief meas-
ures, the share of enterprises that have made or will 
make use of government support measures recently 
saw marked growth.
8 The survey does not provide any information on the 
scale of production relocations.
9 Energy intensity is measured as the percentage share 
of energy costs in total production costs. Enterprises 
with a share of over 10% are classifi  ed as energy- 
intensive.Measures implemented or planned by 
German enterprises in response to the 
rise in energy prices since 2021*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Bundesbank  Online 
Panel  –  Firms  (BOP-F)  survey  in  Q1  2023.  * BOP-F  question: 
“What measures have been taken since 2021 or are planned for 
the near future as a result of the increased energy  costs in your 
enterprise?”  1 Enterprise  turnover  figures  winsorised  at  p95. 
2 Measures  have  either  been  taken  since  2022  or  are  also 
planned for the future. 3 Measures are exclusively planned for 
the future.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70As a percentage, weighted answers based on enterprise turnover1
Manufacturing
(541 enterprises)All economic sectors
(3,070 enterprises)
Relocation of
production abroadPlanned 3
Replacement with
other fossil fuelsImports of energy-
intensive intermediate
productsCutbacks to productionUse of government
support measuresIncreased use of
renewable energyChanges in behaviour
to reduce energy
consumptionInvestments to 
improve energy 
efficiencyPrice increasesSince 20222
Planned 3Since 20222Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
27
levels, greenhouse gas neutrality by 2045). The 
expansion of domestic energy production 
through low- emission renewable energy 
sources is one step along this path. Others in -
clude a reduction in energy consumption and 
an increase in energy efficiency. According to 
various studies modelling transitional paths to 
achieving these climate targets, Germany 
would still ultimately need to import energy (in 
this case from non- fossil energy sources) in 
order to meet its energy needs. However, the 
net import volume would be smaller than be -
fore the transition.32
However, energy is likely to remain a scarce 
commodity on the path to transition, as de -
mand for electricity, in particular, would rise 
sharply and requires a huge expansion of pro -
duction capacity. This would also entail an ex -
tensive need for technologies such as storage 
and power grids to reconcile renewable energy 
production and energy needs.33 This is one of 
the reasons why the shift towards low- emission energy supply requires high additional invest -
ment in the aggregate capital stock over a 
longer period of time.34
The expansion of domestic energy production 
from renewable energy sources could be accel -
erated in Germany by improving framework 
Energy transition 
requires strong 
expansion of 
electricity supply 
and additional 
technologiescut their production and 11% were plan-
ning to do so in the near future (in each 
case measured in terms of turnover).10 In 
this case as well, though, the turnover share 
of those enterprises that in 2022 either had 
relocated parts of their production abroad 
or were planning to do so was quite small, 
at just under 6%.
10 These data are subject to particular uncertainty 
owing to the smaller sample size used.
32 See Boston Consulting Group (2021), Institute of Energy 
Economics at the University of Cologne (2021), Fraunhofer 
Institute for Solar Energy Systems (2021), Prognos et al. 
(2021) and Stolten et al. (2021).
33 Furthermore, the 65% reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions by 2030 compared with 1990 levels appears am -
bitious, as the annual reduction in the remaining period 
would have to be just over twice as large as the average of 
the past 32 years.
34 See KfW Research (2021). Moreover, it is likely that 
there will be additional adjustment costs related to the im -
pact of ongoing climate change. The effects of climate 
change mitigation investment on the aggregate capital 
stock are a priori unclear, as additional investment is offset 
by increased depreciation. Hence, existing fixed assets that 
would not have reached the end of their useful lives with -
out decarbonisation investment would need to be re -
placed. It is difficult to quantify the additional depreciation, 
as this requires a detailed analysis of the capital replace -
ment needed to decarbonise the economy in the various 
areas of the capital stock. See Joint Economic Forecast Pro -
ject Group (2022).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
28
conditions. Greater incentives to use renewable 
energy could arise from the inclusion of all sec -
tors in the EU emissions trading system.35 A 
comprehensive emissions trading scheme of 
this kind would harmonise the costs of CO₂ 
emissions and would provide a transparent 
safeguard for existing climate targets. EU emis -
sions trading has so far covered the energy and 
energy- intensive industry segments.36 The 
European Union’s plans to create an additional 
trading system covering buildings and transport 
are a step in the right direction.37 For reasons 
of efficiency, however, it seems sensible to aim 
for a uniform system in the long term, setting a 
single carbon price for all sectors.38 Consistent 
and reliable climate policy provides enterprises 
with the planning certainty needed for invest -
ment and reduces the macroeconomic costs of 
climate policy.39
Other approaches to accelerating the energy 
transition include tailored land use plans, con -
siderably simplified approval processes and 
faster judicial review procedures for the expan -
sion of production facilities and networks. In 
addition, it would be very important to pro -
mote research and development – especially 
with a view to ensuring a cost-  effective bal -
ance between foreseeable strong fluctuations 
in supply and demand, for example for energy 
storage.
Energy- intensive industries, in particular, need 
time to adapt to higher energy prices, whether 
temporary or otherwise. The proposed indus -
trial electricity price cap is intended to contrib -
ute to this. Overall, however, there is a risk that 
such subsidies will slow down structural 
change, weakening incentives to avoid emis -
sions by also promoting electricity generated 
using fossil fuels.40 It therefore seems more ef -
fective to use the available funds to improve 
the framework conditions for the expansion of 
renewable energy, including network infra -
structure.41Better govern -
ment framework 
conditions 
needed for 
expansion of 
renewable 
energy sources, 
as is consistent 
and reliable 
climate  
policy  …
… as well as 
more efficient 
government 
administration 
and approval 
processes
Price signals 
for energy are 
important for 
avoiding 
emissions Energy mix in Germany*
Sources: AGEB (2022) and (2023), BCG (2021), Fraunhofer In-
stitute (2021), Prognos et al. (2021), EWI (2021), Stolten et al. 
(2021) and Bundesbank calculations based on these. * Exclud-
ing the very small contribution of other energy sources. In line 
with German climate targets, scenarios feature a reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 65% by 2030 and green-
house gas neutrality by 2045. 1 X can stand for climate-neutral 
gases and fuels, amongst other things.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021 202202,0004,0006,0008,00010,00012,00014,000Primary energy consumption in petajoules
2045Prog-
nos EWIBCGFraun-
hofer
JülichScenarios byNuclear energy
Net imports electricity
Imports of power-to-X1 
and hydrogenMineral oilsRenewables
Coal
Natural gas
35 The faster reduction in the number of emission permits 
issued free of charge would also contribute here. This 
would also require earlier implementation of the Carbon 
Border Adjustment Mechanism.
36 EU emissions trading currently covers just under 40% of 
total EU greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to the en -
ergy and energy- intensive industry segments, intra-  
European aviation is also included in the existing emissions 
trading system. These sectors account for around 5% of 
aggregate gross value added. Shipping is also to be in -
cluded from 2024.
37 The European Union intends to create an additional, 
independent emissions trading system for the buildings 
and road transport sectors and other industrial sectors 
from 2027 onwards.
38 The European Commission intends to assess by 31 Oc -
tober 2031 whether the integration of the two trading sys -
tems should be pursued.
39 According to the Bundesbank’s scenario calculations 
using the environmental multi- sector DSGE model EMuSe, 
the costs of a disorderly climate policy are higher than 
those of an orderly one; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c). 
Strict carbon pricing is implemented at an early stage in an 
orderly climate policy and the degree of intervention is 
gradually tightened, whereas disorderly climate policy is as -
sumed to intervene noticeably later but commensurately 
more strongly.
40 See Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research 
(2023a).
41 On this topic, the European Commission recently pre -
sented a proposal to reform the design of the EU electricity 
market. The aim is to accelerate the expansion of renew -
able energy in Europe by increasing the use of long- term 
electricity contracts and other measures, whilst at the same 
time promoting European industry through more stable 
electricity prices. See European Commission (2023b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
29
Demographic change
Demographic change is another major chal -
lenge facing the German economy, reducing 
labour supply and increasing competition for 
skilled workers. From the second half of the 
2020s onwards, the working age population 
will decline. This demographic process started 
among the domestic population some time 
ago, but was offset by immigration. As baby 
boomers reach retirement age over the next 15 
years, even immigration is unlikely to offset this 
effect. A more significant factor in the reduc -
tion in labour supply is the effect of changes in the age structure. The higher share of older 
workers alone will cause the participation rate 
of 15 to 74- year- olds in Germany to fall in a 
few years’ time, even if the participation rate 
continues to increase in individual age groups. 
The share of prime age workers, the group in 
which the participation rate is highest, is dwin -
dling. This age structure effect is also likely to 
dampen average working hours, as older per -
sons have a higher preference for part-  time 
work.
The decline in labour supply will also dampen 
fixed capital formation in the future, as fewer 
workers will need to be provided with capital.42 
Productivity developments may also be damp -
ened by the increasing pace of population age -
ing. There is evidence that individual labour 
productivity tends to decline among elderly 
employees and that ageing reduces the cap -
acity to innovate and adapt to new technolo -
gies.43 In addition, resources will tend to be 
increasingly diverted to areas of below- average 
productivity, such as services for the support 
and care of older generations. This resource 
channelling means that the demographic de -
cline in labour supply will dampen the German 
economy’s potential output in the medium 
term.
The above dampening effects on potential out -
put are the result of the status quo of the eco -
nomic policy framework. However, the strength 
of these demographic developments can be 
mitigated by an increased influx of skilled work -
ers from outside Germany. Third countries de -
serve greater attention here, as, owing to simi -
lar demographic developments, economic mi -
gration from other EU countries will no longer 
be able to play the dominant role it has as -
sumed over the past decade. The various initia -
tives taken by the Federal Government in this Demographic 
changes weigh 
on labour 
supply  …… and thus 
German econo -
my’s potential 
output
Making immi -
gration more 
attractive to 
skilled workers 
could mitigate 
brunt of popula -
tion ageingPotential output in Germany*
0.300.30.60.91.21.5
–+++++
* June 2023 estimate. 1 Including migration.
Deutsche Bundesbank2026
to
20302021
to
20252016
to
20202011
to
20152006
to
20102001
to
2005Potential growth (%)
1996
to
2000Year-on-year change
–0.9–0.6–0.30+0.3+0.6+0.9Change in trend hours worked (%)Labour inputTotal factor productivity
Capital input
Labour inputContributions in percentage points
Working age population1
EmploymentParticipation
Working timeContributions in percentage points
42 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017).
43 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
30
area are steps in the right direction.44 Immi -
grants outside the influx of skilled workers 
should also be quickly integrated into the la -
bour market if they have long-  term prospects 
of remaining in Germany.
In order to increase labour force participation 
and working hours beyond the expected trend, 
the institutional framework needs to be ad -
justed in two main ways. First, the participation 
rate of women, in particular, could increase if 
there were better childcare facilities for children 
(and possibly for those in need of long- term 
care) and if the tax and social contributions sys -
tem provided greater incentives for second 
earners to work.45 Second, in order to prolong 
working life as life expectancy increases, it 
seems appropriate to tie the statutory retire -
ment age to life expectancy. This would not 
only bolster economic strength, but would also 
ensure that social contribution and tax rates do 
not need to rise as sharply.46
Enterprises can also set incentives themselves, 
for example through more flexible working 
time models. In addition to incentives for in -
vestment, skilled labour is needed to ensure 
that any transformation is successful and prod -
uctivity potential can be tapped. This will re -
quire better digital skills training, not only for 
employees but also in the education system.
Summary and economic 
policy  conclusions
The challenges facing the German economy 
are complex and often intertwined. Demo -
graphic change is weighing on growth pro -
spects and exacerbating competition for skilled 
workers, who are also needed to make the en -
ergy transition and the digital transformation a 
reality. In foreign trade, there are considerable 
dependencies on China. A sudden break with 
China would likely cause far- reaching disrup -
tions to supply chains and production in Ger -
many, at least in the short term. It would also 
curb progress in the transition to renewable en -ergy that is necessary to achieve climate tar -
gets, as this progress is partly dependent on 
technology components from China. In the 
medium and long term, it is important to cre -
ate the conditions for ensuring that the low-  
emission energy supply remains reliable and 
that energy costs remain affordable. This will 
necessitate an increase in the supply of renew -
able energy and a reduction in energy demand. 
Given all of this, it is difficult to gauge the ex -
tent of both the required and the expected 
structural changes.
So far, the German economy has been in large 
part well positioned. German enterprises con -
tinue to make great use of the opportunities 
offered by international markets. With regard 
to the energy crisis, German enterprises appear 
to have mitigated the immediate effects well 
on average owing to their good profitability 
and financing alongside government assis -
tance. Enterprises have also already taken steps 
to adjust in the face of higher energy prices. 
The price and cost competitiveness of the Ger -
man economy remains favourable on average. 
It also has a well- trained workforce, infrastruc -
ture that remains sound, wage bargainers 
seeking consensus and comparatively stable 
underlying conditions. However, international 
competitiveness rankings point to the need for 
action.47 The largest need to catch up is likely Increase in 
labour force 
participation 
and working 
hours
Education and 
training of 
employees 
important for 
transformation 
of economy 
German econ -
omy faces major 
challenges in 
medium term 
such as demo -
graphic change, 
supply chain 
dependency and  
low- emission 
energy supply  …… but is 
generally  well 
positioned
44 These include the supplement to the 2020 Skilled Immi -
gration Act ( Fachkräfteeinwanderungsgesetz ), the trans -
position of the EU Blue Card for highly qualified persons 
into national law (and opening it up to medium- skilled la -
bour) and the indefinite extension of the Western Balkans 
regulation.
45 For an overview, see, for example, German Council of 
Economic Experts (2021), pp. 232 ff.
46 See, for example, the simulations in Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2022d).
47 In the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness 
ranking, which was updated annually before the pan -
demic, Germany regularly performed well, albeit with a re -
cent declining trend (dropping four places to rank seventh 
out of 141 countries); see Schwab (2019). For an up- to- 
date ranking, see, inter alia, International Institute for Man -
agement Development (2023). This ranking shows a more 
unfavourable picture and further deterioration: Germany 
now ranks 22nd out of 64 countries (a drop of seven 
places).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
31
to be in the arena of digitalisation.48 This could 
provide a significant boost to growth.49
It is the government’s task to support structural 
change with reliable framework conditions. 
Policymakers could improve conditions in Ger -
many as a business location in a number of 
areas that fall under government remit.50 Reli-
able and consistent energy and climate policy is 
essential for sufficiently mobilising private in -
vestment to finance the path to transition. The 
pricing of greenhouse gas emissions via certifi -
cate trading is an efficient tool for this purpose. 
In addition, Germany would need to simplify 
and speed up planning and approval processes. 
This would also include making the administra -
tion and performance of government tasks 
more efficient in general. Digitalisation should 
contribute significantly to this. The government 
could support enterprises’ digitalisation efforts, 
for example, by promoting digital skills more 
strongly in schools and digitalising administra -
tive processes.51
If the statutory retirement age were linked to 
developments in the life expectancy of older 
people, this could support labour force partici -
pation in the face of demographic change. 
Later retirement would allow labour force po -
tential to be exploited more strongly. Further -
more, a school education providing the requis -
ite skills would need to be ensured and immi -
grants would need to be better supported in 
terms of integration into the labour market. 
There is also a need for a tax and social contri -
butions system that provides performance and 
employment incentives, can withstand demo -
graphic change and ensures a politically ac -
ceptable distribution of wealth. Furthermore, it 
is important to future- proof Germany’s trans -
port infrastructure. It would be off the mark for 
the government to give the impression it would 
provide a broad economic safety net to protect 
against any macroeconomic slowdown or 
problems in the corporate sector.Finally, sound government finances do not 
hamper economic development – they are in 
fact an important prerequisite for it. This ap -
plies to Germany and the euro area. Effective 
fiscal rules ensure sound government finances. 
They do not imply that important political pro -
jects should be neglected. They do, however, 
force priorities to be set. This means that add -
itional needs would have to be financed dir -
ectly through lower expenditure or additional 
revenue elsewhere. Fiscal rules have recently 
been interpreted very broadly by central and 
state governments. It is important to be able to 
rely on credible and binding fiscal rules again in 
the future. At present, the debt brake is making 
the borrowing framework relatively restrictive. 
A reform that moderately raised the regular 
limits of the debt brake and simultaneously in -
creased its binding force would therefore also 
be justifiable in the interests of stable govern -
ment finances. The Bundesbank has made pro -
posals for a stability- oriented reform.52 For ex -
ample, the scope for deficits could be extended 
if the debt ratio is below 60%. If investments 
were to be prioritised within the limits, leeway 
could be reserved for net investment.
In view of the improvement to government 
framework conditions, the ten- point plan pre -
sented by the Federal Government at the Cab -
inet meeting in Meseberg in August 2023 de -
serves support. It addresses important struc -
tural problems and weaknesses, but is not yet 
sufficient to truly address the challenges. Suc -
cess will also depend on how the plan is imple -
mented and pursued.Government 
framework 
conditions  con -
ducive to com -
petitiveness and 
transformation 
are important
Ready tax and 
social contribu -
tions system to 
withstand 
demographic 
changeSound govern -
ment finances 
do not contra -
dict but instead 
provide a foun -
dation for solid 
growth
Meseberg deci -
sions move in 
right direction – 
but not yet 
sufficient 
48 See Schwab (2019).
49 For more information on the macroeconomic import -
ance of digitalisation, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a).
50 The corporate tax burden in Germany is high by inter -
national standards; see Leibniz Centre for European Eco -
nomic Research (2023b). This makes the other conditions 
making Germany favourable as a business location all the 
more important.
51 See German Council of Economic Experts (2021).
52 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
32
List of references
Aksoy, C., A. Baur, L. Flach and B. Javorcik (2022), Reacting to Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence 
from German Firms, ifo Schnelldienst digital, Vol. 3, No 7, 01-05.
Antràs, P . (2020), De- Globalisation? Global Value Chains in the Post- COVID-  19 Age, NBER Working 
Papers, 28115, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Baur,  A. and L.  Flach (2022), Deutsch- chinesische Handelsbeziehungen: Wie abhängig ist 
Deutschland vom Reich der Mitte?, ifo Schnelldienst, Vol. 75, No 4, 13 April 2022.
Boston Consulting Group – BCG (2021), Klimapfade 2.0. Ein Wirtschaftsprogramm für Klima und 
Zukunft, expert report for the Federation of German Industries, October 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023a), The impact of digitalisation on labour productivity growth, Monthly 
Report, March 2023, pp. 43-65.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023b), German enterprises’ profitability and financing in 2021, Monthly 
Report, March 2023, pp. 67-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023c), Impact of higher energy costs on the profitability of German indus -
trial enterprises, Monthly Report, March 2023, pp. 69-70.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2023d), Documentation of the Bundesbank Online Panel Firms (BOP-  F), 
Questionnaire 13, Waves 27-29, April-  June 2023, p. 20.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022a), Digitalisation in the German corporate sector since the onset of 
the coronavirus pandemic, Monthly Report, September 2022, pp. 54-55.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022b), Impact of permanently higher energy costs on German potential 
output, Monthly Report, December 2022, pp. 29-30.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022c), Climate change and climate policy: analytical requirements and 
options from a central bank perspective, Monthly Report, January 2022, pp. 33-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022d), Pension insurance scheme: long- term scenarios and reform 
options , Monthly Report, June 2022, pp. 47-61.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2022e), Central government’s debt brake: options for stability- oriented 
further  development, Monthly Report, April 2022, pp. 49-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021a), The slowdown in euro area productivity growth, Monthly Report, 
January 2021, pp. 15-46.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021b), Cross- border corporate takeovers: the impact of internationalisa -
tion on enterprises in Germany, Monthly Report, July 2021, pp. 15-30.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
33
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021c), Pandemic- induced damage to German potential output moderate 
so far, Monthly Report, December 2021, pp. 30-32.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Consequences of increasing protectionism, Monthly Report, January 
2020, pp. 45-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Demographic change, immigration and the potential output of the 
German economy, Monthly Report, April 2017, pp. 35-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), On the weakness of global trade, Monthly Report, March 2016, 
pp. 13-35.
Dorn, F., L. Flach, C. Fuest and L. Scheckenhofer (2022), Langfristige Effekte von Deglobalisierung 
und Handelskriegen auf die deutsche Wirtschaft, ifo Schnelldienst, 2022, Vol. 75, No 9, 14 Sep -
tember 2022.
European Commission (2023a), Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council establishing a framework for ensuring a secure and sustainable supply of critical raw ma -
terials and amending Regulations (EU) 168/ 2013, (EU) 2018/ 858, 2018/ 1724 and (EU) 2019/ 1020, 
COM/ 2023/ 160 final.
European Commission (2022), Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council establishing a framework of measures for strengthening Europe’s semiconductor eco-
system (Chips Act), COM/ 2022/ 46 final.
European Commission (2019), State aid: Commission approves €3.2 billion public support by seven 
Member States for a pan- European research and innovation project in all segments of the battery 
value chain, press release of 9 December 2019, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/
detail/en/ip_19_6705
Federal Statistical Office (2022a), Umweltökonomische Gesamtrechnungen, Energiegesamtrech -
nung, Berichtszeitraum 2000-2020, Tabelle 3.1 Primärenergieverbrauch – Kraftwerksverluste und 
Eigenverbrauch beim Verbraucher, p. 57.
Federal Statistical Office (2022b), Facts on gas supply: natural gas is major energy source for indus -
try and households, Press release, No N 044, 21 July 2022.
Felbermayr, G., H. Mahlkow and A. Sandkamp (2023), Cutting through the value chain: the long- 
run effects of decoupling the East from the West, Empirica, Vol. 50.
Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE (2021), Wege zu einem klimaneutralen Ener -
giesystem. Die deutsche Energiewende im Kontext gesellschaftlicher Verhaltensweisen, Update 
November 2021: Klimaneutralität 2045, November 2021.
Fuest, C., L. Flach, F. Dorn and L. Scheckenhofer (2022): Geopolitische Herausforderungen und 
ihre Folgen für das deutsche Wirtschaftsmodell, ed.: Bavarian Business Association, study prepared 
by the ifo Institute, August 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
34
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2022), Economy in the wake of the energy price 
crisis, DIHK Economic Survey Fall 2022, p. 16.
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry (2021), DIHK- Umfrage zu Lieferengpässen und 
Rohstoffknappheit, Blitzumfrage Lieferengpässe, August 2021.
German Council of Economic Experts (2021), Shaping the transformation: education, digitalisation 
and sustainability, Annual Report 2021/ 22.
Institute of Energy Economics at the University of Cologne (EWI) (2021), dena- Leitstudie Aufbruch 
Klimaneutralität. Klimaneutralität 2045 – Transformation der Verbrauchssektoren und des Energie-
systems, ed.: Deutsche Energie-  Agentur GmbH (dena), October 2021.
International Energy Agency (2021), The Role of Critical World Energy Outlook Special Report 
Minerals  in Clean Energy Transitions, World Energy Outlook Special Report.
International Institute for Management Development (2023), World Competitiveness Yearbook, 
2023.
Joint Economic Forecast Project Group (2022), From Pandemic to Energy Crisis – Economy and 
Politics under Permanent Stress, Spring 2022.
KfW Research (2021), Investing EUR 5 trillion to reach climate neutrality – a surmountable chal -
lenge, Focus on Economics, No 350.
Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research (2023a), Brückenstrompreis: Fehler aus der Ver -
gangenheit fortführen?, ZEW policy brief, No 06, May 2023.
Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research (2023b), Mannheim tax index – 2022 update, 
https://www.zew.de/mannheim-tax-index
Prognos, Öko- Institut and Wuppertal Institute (2021), Climate- Neutral Germany 2045: How Ger -
many can achieve its climate targets even before 2050, summary commissioned by the Climate 
Neutrality Foundation, Agora Energiewende and Agora Verkehrswende, June 2021.
Schwab, K. (2019), Global Competitiveness Report 2019, World Economic Forum.
Stolten, D., P . Markewitz, T. Schöb, F. Kullmann, L. Kotzur et al. (2021), New targets using old path -
ways? Strategies for a greenhouse gas neutral energy supply by 2045, abridged version, Forschungs-
zentrum Jülich GmbH.
Working Group on Energy Balances (2023), Energy Consumption in Germany in 2022, March 
2023.
Working Group on Energy Balances (2022), Evaluation Tables on the Energy Balance, data covering 
1990-2021, September 2022.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
September 2023  
35
