VOXEU/ COLUMNS
In this section
  
‘Connector’ countries in a geoeconomically fragmented world
 / 24 Aug 2024
As the global economy fragments along geopolitical lines, countries are seeking new ways to flourish, or at least insulate themselves
against geopolitical shocks. Drawing from a newly constructed database, this column explores the concept of ‘connector’ countries,
which can be vertical along supply chains or horizontal across markets. The authors argue that vertical connectors may increasingly
come under political pressure, whereas horizontal connectors may be more resilient to geopolitical shocks. Countries that are more
open to global trade and investment and have more efficient financial markets are better horizontal connectors.
AUTHORS
Shekhar Aiyar
 ;  ; 
 ;  
Franziska Ohnsorge
 
Geopolitical differences dampen bilateral trade and investment. Since 2016, international political tensions have grown and global trade and
investment have begun to fragment along geopolitical lines, a phenomenon that has been dubbed ʻgeoeconomic fragmentationʼ (Aiyar et al.
2023a , Campos et al. 2023) .
In principle, a country that relies heavily on economic transactions with countries with diverging geopolitical views is at greater risk of
geopolitical disruptions. But risk may also turn to opportunity: a country that interacts with a wide range of partner countries with diverse
geopolitical leanings might be more resilient to disruptions from individual partner countries, and might even benefit due to trade or FDI
diversion from rival blocs. Gopinath et al. (2024)  call such countries ʻconnectorsʼ.Shekhar Aiyar ,Franziska Ohnsorge 
Non-resident Fellow,BruegelAssistant Director, Research Department,International Monetary FundVisiting Scholar, School of Advanced
International Studies,Johns Hopkins UniversityVisiting Professor,National Council of Applied Economic Research
Research Associate, CAMA and Chief Economist for South Asia,The World Bank
VOXEU COLUMN GLOBAL ECONOMY INTERNATIONAL TRADEhttps://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 1/6
In a recent paper (Aiyar and Ohnsorge 2024) , we formalise the concept of connectedness as the property of transacting with international
partners drawn from across the ideological spectrum, and discuss some examples of connector countries. We also show that more open and
financially developed countries tend to be more connected.
Data and methodology
Following Aiyar et al. (2023b ) and Gopinath et al. (2024) , we use data on voting patterns at the United Nations to measure a countryʼs
geopolitical stance. Specifically, we employ the ideal point index calculated by Bailey et al. (2017) . Broadly speaking, over the past decade
countriesʼ geopolitical stances have been clustered into two camps: emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) and advanced
economies (Figure 1). Most EMDEs have voting patterns similar to China, while most advanced economies have voting patterns somewhere
between the US and China, but closer to the US.
Figure 1 Distribution of geopolitical stances, 2023
Source: Bailey et al. (2017); Aiyar and Ohnsorge (2024).
Note: The figure shows the ideal point index, a measure of geopolitical stance based on UN voting patterns.
The ideal point distance (IPD) between two countries at any given point in time measures bilateral ʻgeopolitical distanceʼ. We combine this
with bilateral data on trade (primarily from CEPII and the IMFʼs Direction of Trade Statistics), foreign direct investment (FDI, mainly from
the IMFʼs Coordinated Direct Investment Survey and the OECD), portfolio liabilities (from the IMFʼs Coordinated Portfolio Investment
Survey), and cross-border bank liabilities (from BIS Consolidated Banking Statistics). The resulting database is available at Harvard
Dataverse.
Previous papers, based on proprietary databases, have shown that an increase in geopolitical distance between a pair of countries is
associated with diminished bilateral transactions (e.g. Aiyar et al. 2023b  for FDI, and Gopinath et al. 2024 for trade). We find greater
geopolitical distance is associated with significantly diminished transactions across all categories. The effect is strongest for FDI, with more
muted effects for capital goods exports, portfolio investment liabilities, and liabilities to BIS-reporting banks.
Geoeconomic vulnerability and geoeconomic connectedness
Following IMF (2023) , we create an index of geoeconomic vulnerability, GeoV, that is defined as the transaction-weighted average of
geopolitical distances. Thus, for example, Mexicoʼs GeoV for exports is calculated by multiplying its IPD vis-vis a given country by the share
of Mexicoʼs exports to that country, and then summing over countries.  GeoV captures the intuition that the more a country transacts with
geopolitically distant countries, the greater its vulnerability to a geopolitical shock.
But, of course, this simple weighted average is only one aspect of a more complicated story. In a geopolitically fragmented world, it may not
be wise to put all oneʼs eggs in a single basket. While a country may have a low probability of being hit by a geopolitical shock if it only trades
with one politically aligned partner, it would be devastated if a shock actually materialises. From this perspective, diversifying transactions
across partners drawn from a range of geopolitical preferences could build resilience to shocks.
We construct an index of geoeconomic connectedness, GeoC, based on the weighted standard deviation of a countryʼs geopolitical distance
from partner countries. Roughly speaking, this means that a country is more connected if its transactions are balanced across many
partners drawn from the full range of ideological preferences. GeoC has several attractive properties apart from its simplicity; it uses all the
bilateral data available, and does not require any assumptions about which countries belong to which blocs. To the best of our knowledge, it
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 2/6
is the first quantitative proposal for measuring how connected a country is in the geopolitical sphere, in a way that is comparable across
countries, across time, and across types of transactions.
The difference between GeoV and GeoC is illustrated by the simple example in Table 1. Suppose that a country initially trades equally with
four partner countries, at varying geopolitical distances. Now suppose that the country reduces its trade with the geopolitically closest
partner, while increasing its trade with the most geopolitically distant partner. Clearly, this increases geoeconomic vulnerability. Conversely,
if it increases its trade weight with the geopolitically closest partner, while reducing its trade weight with the most geopolitically distant
partner, this reduces geoeconomic vulnerability. But connectedness is reduced in either case, because the country now transacts with a
more geopolitically concentrated set of countries.
Table 1 Interpretation of GeoV and GeoC
Source: Aiyar and Ohnsorge (2024).
‘Vertical’ versus ‘horizontal’ connectors: Mexico vs Vietnam
In principle, one could think of connector countries as connectors across markets or connectors across types of transaction.
Consider Mexico and Vietnam. Both have a similar degree of FDI diversification. However, Mexicoʼs exports are overwhelmingly to a single
country, the US, whereas Vietnamʼs exports are among the most diversified for EMDEs (Figure 2).
When authors such as Gopinath et al. (2024)  or Alfaro and Chor (2023)  refer to Mexico as a connector country, they are appealing to the
concept of connectors across types of transactions in particular supply chains, akin to a ʻvertical connectorʼ: the idea that Mexico will
increasingly use Chinese FDI to produce exports for the US market, thus substituting for direct Chinese exports to the US.
But whether this type of connector will gain traction at scale is a matter of some doubt. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump, in
his speech at the Republican National Convention, stated: “[a]nd right now as we speak, large factories, just started, are being built across
the border in Mexico. [T]heyʼre being built by China to make cars and to sell them into our country, no tax, no anything…[W]eʼre going to
bring back car manufacturing and weʼre going to bring it back fast.” (New York Times 2024) . Similar sentiments have been expressed in more
guarded language by Katherine Tai, the Biden administrationʼs trade representative (Associated Press 2024) .
In contrast, Vietnamʼs highly diversified base of export destinations, akin to a ʻhorizontal connectorʼ, gives it some protection against
geopolitical risk. If a geopolitical shock were to cut it off suddenly from one export partner, it would have many other partners to turn to. It is
therefore a connector across markets. Since this is the conceptual underpinning of our metric of connectedness, Vietnam has a much higher
GeoC than Mexico.
Figure 2 Geoeconomic connectedness of Mexican and Vietnamese exports and FDI liabilities, latest
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 3/6
Source: Bailey et al. (2017); IMF; Aiyar and Ohnsorge (2024); World Bank.
Note: Geoeconomic connectedness is the export or FDI liability-weighted standard deviation of ideal point distances for Mexico and Vietnam. Latest
available data for FDI are 2022; for exports 2023.
Correlates of connectedness
Which countries are more connected across ideologically disparate partners, thus enabling them to develop some degree of resilience to
growing geopolitical fragmentation?
We find that openness is important along several dimensions. A countryʼs exports are more geoeconomically connected when tariffs are lower
and when the country is part of a larger free trade area. Higher-quality logistics – including the ability to track and trace shipments, fewer
delays at ports, better trade and transport infrastructure, and more streamlined customs procedures – are also beneficial. And EMDEs with
more open capital accounts tend to attract more diversified sources of capital inflows.
Financial market development is particularly important for diversified capital inflows. Deeper and more sophisticated financial markets and
institutions facilitate entry and exit and are associated with greater connectedness in FDI, portfolio liabilities, and lending from global
banks.
It should be noted that these correlates of greater connectedness are just that – correlates. More research would be required to establish a
causal relationship between policy variables and the ability to flourish in a geoeconomically fragmented world. We hope that our work
provides a useful first step.
References
Aiyar, S, P Gourinchas, A Presbitero and M Ruta (2023) , “Geoeconomic fragmentation: A new e-book”, VoxEU.org, 2 October.
Aiyar, S, D Malacrino, and A Presbitero (2024) , “Investing in Friends: The Role of Geopolitical Alignment in FDI Flows”, European Journal of
Political Economy 83(C): 102508.
Alfaro, L and D Chor (2023) , “Global Supply Chains: The Looming ʻGreat Reallocationʼ”, NBER Working Paper 31661.
Associated Press (2024) , “US suggests possibility of penalties if if production of Chinese electric vehicles moves to Mexico”, 14 May.
Campos, R, J Flores, D Furceri and J Timini (2023) , “Geopolitical fragmentation and trade”, VoxEU.org, 31 July. 
Gopinath, G, P Gourinchas, A Presbitero, and P Topalova (2024) , “Changing Global Linkages: A New Cold War?”, IMF Working Paper 24/76.
IMF (2023a ), World Economic Outlook, April 2023: Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment, Chapter 4.
New York Times (2024) , “Transcript of Donald J. Trumpʼs Convention Speech”, 19 July.
AUTHORS
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 4/6
Business Cycles
Central Banking
Climate Change
Competition Policy
COVID-19
Development & Growth
Economic history
EnergyEU Economic Architecture
Exchange Rates
Finance and Fintech
Financial Markets
Financial Regulation and Banking
Health Economics
Inflation
International FinanceInternational trade
Labour Markets
Migration
Monetary Policy
Political Economy
Poverty and Income Inequality
Productivity and Innovation
TaxationTHEMES & CURRENT ISSUES
Shekhar Aiyar
 ; 
 ; 
 
;  Franziska Ohnsorge
THEMES
GLOBAL ECONOMY INTERNATIONAL TRADEKEYWORDS
GEO-ECONOMIC FRAGMENTATION GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS
SHARE
Non-resident Fellow,BruegelAssistant Director, Research
Department,International Monetary FundVisiting Scholar,
School of Advanced International Studies,Johns Hopkins
UniversityVisiting Professor,National Council of Applied
Economic Research
Research Associate, CAMA and Chief Economist for South Asia,
The World Bank
Geoeconomic fragmentation: A new eBook
2 OCT 2023Geopolitical fragmentation and trade
31 JUL 2023
Geo-economic fragmentation and the world economy
27 MAR 2023Shekhar Aiyar, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Andrea Presbitero, Michele Ruta
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
/POLITICS AND ECONOMICSRodolfo Campos, Julia Estefania Flores, Davide Furceri, Jacopo Timini
POLITICS AND ECONOMICS
/TRADE
Shekhar Aiyar, Anna Ilyina
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
/POLITICS AND ECONOMICS
VoxEU COLUMN VoxEU COLUMN
VoxEU COLUMN
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 5/6
SIGN UP TO OUR NEWSLETTER
Your email address SIGN UPFOLLOW US
Copyright 2025 CEPR /designbysoapbox.comContact UsCookiesPrivacy PolicyRSS FeedsUkraine Initiative Women in Economics
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/connector-countries-geoeconomically-fragmented-world 6/6
