Questioni di Economia e Finanza
(Occasional Papers)Inputs in geopolitical distress:  
a risk assessment based on micro data
by Alessandro Borin, Gianmarco Cariola, Elena Gentili, Andrea Linarello,  
Michele Mancini, Tullia Padellini, Ludovic Panon and Enrico Sette
Number819November 2023

Questioni di Economia e Finanza
(Occasional Papers )Number 819 – November 2023Inputs in geopolitical distress:  
a risk assessment based on micro data
by Alessandro Borin, Gianmarco Cariola, Elena Gentili, Andrea Linarello,  
Michele Mancini, Tullia Padellini, Ludovic Panon and Enrico Sette
The series Occasional Papers  presents studies and documents on issues pertaining to 
the institutional tasks of  the Bank of  Italy and the Eurosystem. The Occasional Papers  appear 
alongside the Working Papers  series which are specifically aimed at providing original contributions 
to economic research.
The Occasional Papers  include studies conducted within the Bank of  Italy, sometimes 
in cooperation with the Eurosystem or other institutions. The views expressed in the studies are those of  
the authors and do not involve the responsibility of  the institutions to which they belong.
The series is available online at  www.bancaditalia.it  .  
ISSN 1972-6643 (online)
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of  the Bank of  Italy
INPUTS IN GEOPOLITICAL DISTRESS:  
A RISK ASSESSMENT BASED ON MICRO DATA  
 
 
by Alessandro Borin*, Gianmarco Cariola **, Elena Gentili**, Andrea Linarello*,  
Michele Mancini*, Tullia Padellin i*, Ludovic Panon* and Enrico Sette*  
 
Abstract 
Using customs and balance sheet data for It aly, we identify forei gn-dependent products 
(FDPs) and quantify the effect of  any disruptions to those pro ducts. Our framework allows us 
to assess how geoeconomic fragmentation aff ects value added at different levels of 
aggregation. Our baseline calibra tion suggests that a reduction in  the imports of FDPs from 
high geopolitical risk c ountries would result in a 2 pe r cent drop in GDP, with sizable 
heterogeneity across firms, regi ons, and sectors. Our findings hi ghlight that the short-term 
costs of supply disruptions for critical inputs can be substantial, especially when firms cannot 
easily substitute away from those products.  
 
JEL Classification : F10, F14. 
Keywords : Geoeconomic fragmentation, international trade, imported inputs, GVC. 
DOI : 10.32057/0.QEF.2023.0819 
Contents 
 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................... ............ 5 
2. Exposure to China: evidence from survey data ..................................................................... 8 3. Identifying foreign-dependent products .............................................................................. 11 
3.1 Data ...................................................................................................................... ........ 11 
3.2 Methodology ............................................................................................................... . 12 
3.3 Stylized facts ............................................................................................................ .... 14 
3.4 Discussion ................................................................................................................ .... 18 
4. Risk-assessment: supply shortages of FDPs ........................................................................ 20 
4.1 Model ..................................................................................................................... ....... 21 
4.2 Calibration ............................................................................................................... ..... 22 
4.3 Results ................................................................................................................... ....... 23 
4.4 Additional results ........................................................................................................ . 26 
5. Conclusions ................................................................................................................ ......... 27 
References .................................................................................................................... ............ 27 
Appendix ...................................................................................................................... ............ 31 
 
_______________________________________ 
*  Bank of Italy, Directorate General Economics, Statistics and Research. 
** Bank of Italy, Bologna Branch, Regional Economic Research Unit. 

1 Introduction1
After decades of increasing economic integration across nations and regions through
the rise of global value chains, the unprecedented events of the COVID-19 pan-
demic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine have highlighted the vulnerabilities
associated with excessive reliance on foreign inputs.2Subsequently, supply dis-
ruptions and demand shocks have significantly disrupted international production
networks. All these events triggered a major geopolitical rift, further increasing the
risk of a reversal of international economic integration, referred to as “geoeconomic
fragmentation” (Aiyar et al., 2023).
In many advanced countries, policymakers and enterprises took actions to mit-
igate exposure to critical dependencies, with a focus on strategic sectors and rela-
tionships with geopolitically vulnerable nations. Public initiatives aimed at diver-
sifying global supply chains and enhancing their resilience included tax incentives,
subsidies, and public loans to support new investments, as well as encouraging
“on-shoring” and “reshoring” of multinational corporations’ foreign activities.3Ex-
port restrictions on specific strategic products have also been implemented.4This
increased “weaponization” of supply interdependencies could trigger sharp eco-
nomic losses and inflationary pressures.
In this context, the identification of foreign-dependent products (FDPs) —i.e.
vulnerable inputs —becomes key to assessing the potential impact of decoupling
scenarios on economic activity.5In this paper, we use firm-level data to calibrate
a tractable yet parsimonious model of supply disruptions. We use it to assess how
disruptions generated by a sudden cut in imports of FDPs would affect the economy
at different levels of aggregation.
First, we provide motivating evidence that Italian firms report a strong depen-
dence from foreign critical inputs. To this aim, we rely on a unique survey dataset
from the Bank of Italy that focuses on firms’ exposure to critical inputs from China.6
1The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
those of the Bank of Italy. We thank Antoine Berthou, Francesco Paolo Conteduca, and seminar
participants at the ESCB Trade Expert Network, and ECB-Bank of Canada conference on Global
trade integration and shifting geopolitics for their insightful comments.
2While the pandemic vividly demonstrated the challenge of accessing essential goods such as
medical protective devices and equipment, the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the ensuing energy
crisis stressed the excessive dependency on key raw materials.
3See for instance the “CHIPS and Science Act” and the “Inflation Reduction Act” in the US and
the “InvestEU”, “REPowerEU” and the “Green Deal Industrial Plan” in the European Union.
4For instance, China’s export restrictions on rare-earth minerals used in semiconductor and elec-
tric vehicle production followed those on semiconductor sales enforced by the US, Japan and Nether-
lands. See the FT article, “China imposes export curbs on chipmaking metals”, 3 July 2023.
5We use vulnerable inputs and FDPs interchangeably. We prefer the latter label, however, to
stress the dependence on sourcing from foreign countries.
6This is the Survey of Industrial and Service Firms run by the Bank of Italy since the early 80s.
5
Indeed, 15% of Italian firms report being exposed to China through the sourcing of
critical inputs, accounting for around 25% of Italian value-added and employment
in manufacturing. Importantly, firms that account for 7% of manufacturing value-
added and employment are particularly exposed to China: they source critical in-
puts from China that are hard to substitute —as assessed by the firms themselves
—and have no immediate plans to decrease their exposure.
Second, motivated by this evidence and with the goal of providing a more com-
plete picture of foreign dependence that goes beyond China, we subsequently iden-
tify FDPs sourced by firms using customs data from Italy.7We recover a list of 515
FDPs defined at the HS8 level and for which the computers, electronic and optical
products industry accounts for 20% of extra-EU imports.8Matching our list of FDPs
to balance-sheet data on the universe of Italian firms, we unravel stylized facts on
importers of specific inputs: FDPs account for a modest share of firms’ total pur-
chases; diversification of sourcing is limited for FDPs; importers of FDPs account
for a sizable share of the economy and are larger and more productive than other
firms within narrowly defined industries.
Third, we build a framework in which firms combine labor, capital and inter-
mediates in a Cobb-Douglas fashion to produce an output good. Importantly, in-
termediates are produced using FDPs and non-FDPs in a constant-elasticity of sub-
stitution (CES) fashion.9Our baseline scenario consists of a stress test in which
the supply of FDPs from high-geopolitical-risk countries is halved.10The bene-
fit of using granular data is that this aggregate shock can be combined with firms’
heterogeneous exposure to FDPs to generate idiosyncratic shocks. These shift-share
shocks are then fed into our model to assess how geoeconomic fragmentation might
affect firms, regions, sectors and the economy. As our model features a CES produc-
tion function, the impact of firm-level supply disruptions arising from decoupling
is governed by the elasticity of substitution across FDPs and non-FDPs. We offer a
range of estimates that are contingent on the value of this parameter,11to account
for uncertainty surrounding its underlying value. Other parameter values needed
to calibrate the model —sectoral expenditure shares on capital and labor, firms’ ex-
7Our methodology extends that highlighted by the European Commission. The Commission
identifies vulnerable inputs thanks to three criteria. Inputs for which there are few suppliers, that
are mostly imported from extra-EU countries and that are hard to substitute classify as vulnerable.
On top of these criteria, we rely on more disaggregated data and focus on intermediate products
whose trade flows are larger than a certain threshold value so as to capture relevant flows.
8China is a major supplier, but the share of other countries is non-trivial.
9A similar approach has been recently adopted by Bachmann et al. (2022) to analyze the potential
impact of a Russian oil embargo on value-added at the aggregate level.
10We follow Javorcik et al. (2022) and define high-geopolitical-risk countries as those with a dif-
ferent political stance than Italy at the UN general assembly.
11As detailed below, we simply constrain this elasticity to be smaller than 0.2, which is consistent
with recent evidence (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Atalay, 2017; Boehm et al., 2019).
6
penditure shares on FDPs —have a direct counterpart in our micro data. We view
our framework as appropriate to study short-run effects of fragmentation scenarios,
as factors of production other than FDPs are held constant and that the elasticity
of substitution between intermediates is assumed to be smaller than one (Peter and
Ruane, 2023).
We find that the impact of geoeconomic fragmentation is heterogeneous both in
the degree of substitution and across firms. Specifically, the median drop in firm’s
value-added is -35% among exposed firms —about 8,000 firms —when the produc-
tion function is Leontief in FDPs. However, the median decrease is smaller, reach-
ing -1.8% when the elasticity of substitution across FDPs and non-FDPs equals 0.2.
Aggregating these firm-level effects using value-added weights, we find that the
Italian economy could experience a drop in GDP of 2% when FDPs and non-FDPs
are perfect complements.12This reduced impact at the aggregate level is reminis-
cent of the argument that firms may have Leontief technologies while the aggregate
production function is Cobb-Douglas (Houthakker, 1955; Jones, 2005).
We have stressed that our model is tractable in that it can be easily calibrated us-
ing microdata to account for firms’ actual exposure to vulnerable inputs and study
how different decoupling scenarios may affect the economy at different levels of
aggregation in the short-run. It is, however, parsimonious in that it is partial equi-
librium and thus does not account for the possibility that factors of production may
adjust. For this reason, we view our contribution and that of Baqaee and Farhi
(2023) as complementary.13
Finally, we show that relying on industry-level data —rather than firm-level
data —may severely overestimate the impact of geoeconomic fragmentation if the
assumed value of the elasticity of substitution is low enough. In other words, pro-
duction function complementarities are more costly at the aggregate than at the
firm-level because exposure to supply shocks is amplified at the aggregate level.
This highlights the importance of using micro data to monitor supply exposures
and vulnerabilities. Institutions should therefore foster the collection and availabil-
ity of micro data for research purposes.
Related literature. The European Commission has been very active in proposing
methods to analyze vulnerabilities and identify FDPs. More specifically, the Com-
mission has proposed a data-driven, bottom-up approach, complemented by the
discretionary judgment of experts, to retrieve a list of strategic products to be closely
monitored (European Commission, 2021; Arjona et al., 2023). Recently, Ioannou
12Moreover, the effect of geopolitical fragmentation varies substantially across sectors between
-11% and 0% —and regions —ranging from -5% to 0%.
13Their general equilibrium framework can be used to study how decoupling scenarios affect the
economy at a more aggregate level. See related literature.
7
et al. (2023) apply the bottom-up procedure defined by the Commission to provide
an overview of EU dependencies. We contribute to this literature by leveraging on
our foreign transaction dataset to map vulnerabilities at the firm level.14We further
assess how a decrease in the supply of these products coming from fragmentation
would affect the economy.
In parallel, a growing literature focuses on the economic impact of geoeconomic
fragmentation. Attinasi et al. (2023) exploit Baqaee and Farhi (2023)’s model to
quantify the economic effect of a global trade fragmentation scenario.15Despite
the richness of these general equilibrium models, they are ill-suited to evaluate
firms’ exposure to specific supply disruptions —e.g. restrictions imposed by se-
lected high-risk countries on the exports of strategic inputs —and to assess the im-
pact on specific firms or regions. Our contribution is thus to propose an alternative
framework aiming to shed light on the short-run micro costs associated with de-
coupling.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we report survey-
based evidence on the exposure to sourcing critical inputs from China. In Section 3,
we show how to identify FDPs and introduce our stylized facts. Section 4 presents
our framework and results. Section 5 concludes.
2 Exposure to China: evidence from survey data
In this Section, we resort to survey data collected by the Bank of Italy to shed light
on the exposure of firms to critical inputs sourced from China and to provide a first
assessment on the associated economic risk.16The Spring 2023 wave of the sur-
vey included questions regarding how Italian firms assess their exposure to critical
inputs sourced from China and their strategies to increase the resilience of their
supply chain.17
14See Jaravel and M ´ejean (2020) for a notable exception using different criteria on French customs
data.
15Javorcik et al. (2022) further build on Baqaee and Farhi (2023)’s work to investigate the costs
of friend-shoring. Other works rely on multi-country multi-sector models a la Caliendo and Parro
(2015) and Antr `as and Chor (2022), such as Eppinger et al. (2021), G ´oes and Bekker (2022) and Fel-
bermayr et al. (2023). Other studies use different frameworks, as large macroeconomic models (the
METRO model in OECD (2020) and the World Bank ENVISAGE model in Chepeliev et al. (2022)),
Hypothetical Extraction Method (Wu et al., 2021; Giammetti et al., 2021), or CGE models (Lim et al.,
2021).
16These data come from the 2023 Survey of Industrial and Service Firms (INVIND hereafter).
INVIND covers a representative sample of firms operating in the industrial and services sector.
Around 4,000 companies are surveyed each year.
17Critical inputs are defined as those whose shortage would lead to a reduction in the quality of
the good or service produced, or without which a significant part of the production process would
not be completed or would cause considerable delays.
8
Figure 1: Critical Inputs in the Economy
05101520
Manufacturing Service Totalpercent
Import from suppliers Import from own plants
Indirect importEmployment 2022 Value added 202201020percent
Total
Manufacturing Service
Notes: Left panel: Firms sourcing critical inputs from China (share of total firms). Right panel: Ex-
posure to China (share of total employment and value-added). Source: own elaboration on INVIND
data.
Exposure to critical inputs. Almost 15% of Italian firms rely on inputs from China
they deem critical for their activity, as shown in the left panel of Figure 1. About
two-thirds of these firms import such inputs directly from companies located in
China, while slightly less than a third buys it indirectly through a foreign or do-
mestic distributor. Intra-group imports, on the other hand, are modest. Perhaps not
surprisingly given the importance of China in manufacturing, the share of firms im-
porting critical inputs from China is much higher in manufacturing than in services
(20% and 10%, respectively).
Manufacturing firms importing critical inputs from China account for around
25% of Italian manufacturing value-added and employment. Instead, the exposure
in services —mostly driven by the wholesale sector —is much lower: it represents
10% for both value-added and employment, as displayed in the right panel of fig. 1.
For this reason, we now focus only on manufacturing companies in the rest of the
section.18
Subtitutability of critical inputs. We further asked firms how difficult replacing
their critical inputs from China would be, as this important piece of information
cannot be inferred from granular trade data. Figure 2 shows that the degree of
substitution associated with sourcing critical inputs from China is either low or
very low for almost 70% of manufacturing firms. Only 25% of firms consider it to
18The level of exposure is highly heterogeneous across sectors, even within manufacturing. Fig-
ure A1 shows that the basic metals and engineering industry is the most exposed one (close to 35% in
terms of value-added and employment), followed closely by textile, clothing, leather and footwear.
The food industry and non-metallic minerals, on the other hand, appears to be much less exposed,
with shares of value-added and employment comparable to those of services.
9
Figure 2: Substitutability of Critical Inputs from China
6 
  
 
Fig 5. Degree of substitution of critical inputs sourced from China  
 (share of manufacturing firms sourcing critical inputs from China)  
 
Source and notes: own elaboration on INVIND data.  The figure  shows the  distribution 
of manufacturing firms sourcing critical inputs from China by degree of substitution of 
the critical inputs . Data are weighted to provide results that are represen tative of  the 
entire population . 
 
3. How are Italian companies reorganizing their supply chains  to cope with 
increasing geopolitical risks ? 
Italian f irms sourcing  inputs  from  China are actively , and  more than average , 
reorganizing their supply chains  through diversification and , to a lesser extent , 
reshoring  of the suppliers . In 2023,  around two -thirds of manufacturing  firms reporting an 
input exposure  to China have already increased – or are about to increase – the number of 
suppliers of a given input, compared to around 40% of those reporting no exposure (Fig 6a) . 
One-third of exposed firms is replacing  foreign suppliers with other suppliers located closer 
to or in Italy , while this strategy is adopted  by around 15% of non -exposed firms  (Fig 6b) .  
De-risking strategies  are more frequent for users of Chinese inputs that are difficult 
to substitute . Firms exposed to China were specifically asked about the ir strategies to 
reduce purchases of critical inputs from China. Firms stating that they would face challenges 
in finding alternative inputs for critical Chinese components are trying to reduce more their 
exposure on Chinese inputs – or are considering doing so by the end of  2024  – compared 
to firms with a higher degree of input substitutabili ty (almost 60% vs 40% , respectively,  Fig. 
7). Firms are more prone to regionalizing their supply chain (substituting Chinese suppliers 
with EU ones) , rather than reshoring their suppl iers to Italy or sourcing from non -Chinese 
suppliers outside the EU.  
 
 
 
Notes: The bars refer to the extent to which critical inputs sourced from China (share of manufac-
turing firms sourcing critical inputs from China) can be substituted. Source: own elaboration on
INVIND data.
Figure 3: Supply Chain Strategies by degree of substitution of critical inputs
7 
 Fig 6a. Diversification of suppliers in 2023 
(share of manufacturing firms)  Fig 6b. Reshoring of suppliers in 2023  
(share of manufacturing firms)  
 
  
Source and notes: own elaboration on INVIND data. Fig  6a shows the share of manufacturing  firms currently undergoing 
or planning to diversify their  suppliers, and the intensity of their diversification effort. Fig  6b shows the share of 
manufacturing  firms currently undergoing or planning to reshore  their suppliers , and the intensity of their reshoring effort . 
Data are weighted to provide results that are representative of the entire population.  
 
Fig 7. Strategies to reduce exposure to sourcing form China  
(share of firms sourcing critical inputs from  China ; high/low substitutability)  
 
Source  and notes: own elaboration on  INVIND data. The figure shows the strategies adopted to reduce their 
exposure by firms sourcing critical inputs from China  with a low or very low degree of substitution (top bar) 
and high or very high degree of substitution ( bottom bar) . Data are weighted to provide results that are 
representative of the entire population.  
 
 
 
Notes: This figure displays the strategies to reduce exposure to sourcing from China (share of firms
sourcing critical inputs from China; high/low substitutability). Source: own elaboration on INVIND
data.
be at least high or very high.
Supply chain reorganization. How are Italian companies reorganizing their sup-
ply chains to cope with increasing geopolitical risks? De-risking strategies are more
frequent for users of Chinese inputs that are difficult to substitute. Firms exposed
to China were specifically asked about their strategies to reduce purchases of crit-
ical inputs from China. Firms stating that they would face challenges in finding
alternative inputs for critical Chinese components are trying to reduce more their
exposure on Chinese inputs – or are considering doing so by the end of 2024 – com-
pared to firms with a higher degree of input substitutability (almost 60% vs 40%,
10
Figure 4: Exposure to China
9 
 Fig 8. Exposure to China, limited input substitutability  
(share of total employment and value -added  accounted for by firms that buy Chinese inputs 
with low substitutability ) 
 
Source and notes: own e laboration on INVIND data. The figure  shows the share of employment and value -added 
accounted for by firms sourcing critical inputs from China  with a low or very low degree of substitution and the 
strategy they are adopting to reduce their exposure . Data are weighted to provide results that are representative of 
the entire population.  
 
Fig 9a. Negative impact of increase in 
geopolitical tensions , by sectors (share of 
manufacturing firms ) Fig 9 b. Negative impact of increase in 
geopolitical tensions , by channels  (share of 
manufacturing firms)  
  
Source and notes: own e laboration on INVIND data. The figures show  the share  of manufacturing firms that would be 
negatively affected by an increase in tension between China and Western economies by each sector  (Fig 9a) , and the 
channel through which they would be impacted (Fig  9b). Data are weighted to provide results that are representative of 
the entire population.  
 
 
Notes: The figure displays the exposure to China for firms with limited input substitutability (share
of total employment and value-added accounted for by firms that buy Chinese inputs with low
substitutability). Own elaboration on INVIND data.
respectively, Figure 3). Firms would rather regionalize their supply chain (substi-
tuting Chinese suppliers with EU ones), than reshoring their suppliers to Italy or
sourcing from non-Chinese suppliers outside the EU.
Even if de-risking is on the way, a relevant share of manufacturing activity re-
mains highly exposed to fragmentation risks. Around 40% of firms with limited
substitution possibilities are neither implementing, nor planning, any action to re-
duce their exposure to China, possibly because their sourcing from China has no
viable alternative. Notably, Figure 4 shows that these firms represent almost 7%
of total employment and value-added in manufacturing, which suggests a relevant
exposure of the Italian economy to trade disruptions and fragmentation risks.
Overall, amidst growing geopolitical tensions, China represents a key source of
vulnerability.
3 Identifying foreign-dependent products
Given the exposure of firms to China, we detail the methodology used to identify
vulnerable inputs and discuss our key findings.
3.1 Data
Our analysis makes use of three datasets: i) Italian customs data from the Italian
National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) and the Italian Customs and Monopolies
Agency; ii) balance-sheet data from Cerved; iii) international trade data from CEPII
BACI. We use data for 2019, the last year before the Covid pandemic.
11
Customs data. The key information behind the vulnerability indices is contained
in the Italian import data from the ISTAT data warehouse for international trade
statistics, which is based in turn on the microdata of the Italian Customs and Mo-
nopolies Agency (CMA) and is available at the exporting country-product-year
level. Italian firms are required to report to the CMA all transactions with extra-EU
counterparts, indicating the products they trade, the date, the quantity and value
of the transaction, as well as the specific product —at the CN8 level, and country
of origin or destination. Intra-EU trade flows include the same information, but the
frequency of the reporting is either monthly or quarterly depending on the total
traded value.19Product codes are defined at the 8-digit level of the 2019 Combined
Nomenclature (CN), the European counterpart of the Harmonized System nomen-
clature (HS). Unique firm tax identifiers are reported in the customs data, which
allows us to merge the identity of the importing firm with other firm-level datasets.
Balance-sheet and other sectoral data. Our balance-sheet data come from the
Cerved Group. This database provides reclassified balance sheet variables and
indicators for all Italian limited liability companies starting from 1995, excluding
companies operating in the financial and real estate sectors, and companies with no
revenues or assets.
Cerved also includes information on the firm’s sector of economic activity, ac-
cording to the 2-digit ATECO 2007 classification, which is equivalent to the first
two digits of ISIC Rev. 4. We complement this database with the information con-
tained in Infocamere, which is the Official Business Register of Italian Chambers
of Commerce and includes demographic information also for non limited liability
companies. Lastly, we collect sectoral data from the Frame SBS database provided
by ISTAT.20
CEPII BACI trade data. International trade data are recovered through the CEPII-
BACI dataset, which provides data on bilateral trade flows for 200 countries at the
HS-6 level.
3.2 Methodology
To identify foreign-dependent products, we build on the methodology originally
developed by the European Commission (European Commission, 2021) and used
also in Ioannou et al. (2023). The idea behind this methodology is that a product is
19In our case, the frequency of the reporting does not affect the analysis, because the data are
aggregated at the year level.
20This database complements administrative data on business units with survey and balance-
sheet data and is one of the major sources for national accounts statistics.
12
foreign-dependent if imports of that product are highly concentrated, its availabil-
ity within the EU is scarce, and it is difficult to substitute. To do so, we compute
a concentration index, a scarcity index, and a substitutability index for each HS8
product imported by Italy. In this section, we provide a brief overview of these
indices.
Concentration index. Concentration of imports from extra-EU countries is mea-
sured through an Herfindahl index:
HHI jp=Njp
∑
i=1 
ωijp2(1)
where iare extra-EU countries, ωijpis country i’s export share of product pto
country jin country j’s total imports of product pfrom extra-EU countries, i.e.,
ωijp:=Xijp/∑iXijp, and Njpis the total number of countries exporting product
pto country j.21If HHI jp=1, this means that country jdepends solely on one
extra-EU supplier. In our paper, jdenotes Italy.
Scarcity index. The EC further uses a “scarcity” indicator (European Commission,
2021) ,22which is defined as:
Scarce j,p=MExtra
j,p
MExtra
j,p+MIntra
j,p(2)
This index ranges from 0 to 1 and is equal to 0 if country jdoes not import product
pfrom extra-EU suppliers. Therefore, the index will be low if imports from other
EU members are high compared to those from outside the EU.23
Subtitutability index. The last criterion used to identify FDPs aims to measure
the substitutability of extra EU imports with a country’s production. It is defined
as the ratio of extra-EU imports to total exports for a given product p:24
Substitute jp=MExtra
jp
XExtra
jp+XIntra
jp(3)
21Let us note that HHI jpvaries across products and destination countries.
22The European Commission refers to it as the “importance of extra EU imports in total demand”.
23With some abuse of notation, we label this measure a scarcity index. Indeed, Italian firms may
import relatively more from extra-EU countries because they find it cheaper to do so. The index,
however, aims at identifying products whose demand from the point of view of Italian firms is
mainly met through imports from extra-EU countries.
24While domestic production would be needed, the European Commission notes that PRODCOM
contains too many missing values at the 6-digit level.
13
This measure’s goal is to assess whether a country’s production would be sufficient
to replace extra-EU imports in the event of an input disruption. The higher the
index, the harder it might be to substitute away from extra-EU countries.25
This measure does not account for the network structure and how central sup-
pliers of specific products might be —and thus how easy it may be to substitute
away from specific suppliers. We address this limitation in Section 3.4.2.
Criteria. To operationalize the identification of FDPs, one needs to take a stance on
threshold values for the criteria defined above. The European Commission fixes the
following thresholds to pin down foreign dependencies (European Commission,
2021), which we follow:
HHI jp>0.4
Scarce jp>0.5
Substitute jp>1
While we rely on these three criteria to recover a list of foreign-dependent inputs,
we add two other criteria. First, the value of imports has to be larger than one mil-
lion euros for a product to be classified as foreign-dependent, thereby allowing us
to focus on quantitatively relevant flows. Second, we focus on intermediate goods
according to the Broad Economic Categories (BEC) classification and thus exclude
final goods and energy commodities. This last criterion permits focusing on inter-
mediate goods, which account for two-thirds of international trade (Johnson and
Noguera, 2017).
3.3 Stylized facts
3.3.1 Foreign-dependent products
Using the criteria described above, we identify 515 FDPs. As highlighted in Fig-
ure 5, half of these FDP have a HHI above 67% while the median for the extra-EU
import share is 80%. Our methdology allows us to define vulnerable produts at
a very high level of granularity. For instance, Electronic, integrated, circuits (HS
code 85423919) or Insulin and its salts (HS code 29371200) for which South Korea
and the US are the most important foreign exporters to Italy, respectively. Reas-
suringly, some of these products —for instance, LEDs, Data, processing, machines
from China —overlap with some HS6 codes identified by the European Central
25Following the EC, we rely on imports from extra-EU suppliers while exports include both intra-
and extra-EU flows. Given our focus on a particular EU country, this means that we implicitly as-
sume that in the case of a disruption, exports to both EU and non-EU countries could be repurposed.
14
Figure 5: Concentration and Extra-EU Import Share of FDPs
Notes: The figure displays the values of the extra-EU import share (y-axis) and HHI (x-axis) of
foreign dependent products (FDPs). The size of the markers represents the import value of each
FDP .
Figure 6: Extra-EU Import Share of FDPs by Country
Notes: The bars represent the share of each extra-EU country’s exports of foreign dependent prod-
ucts (FDPs) in Italian imports of FDPs from all extra-EU countries.
Bank in their recent report (Ioannou et al., 2023). We then investigate the distribu-
tion of main exporters of foreign-dependent products. As is evident in Figure A2,
this distribution is very skewed. Indeed, while China is the main exporter of FDPs
for about 40% of these goods (194 FDPs out of 515), the United States are the second
most important supplier of 53 FDPs while Turkey follows closely with 42 products.
Finally, we explore the country and sectoral import shares of FDPs in extra-EU
imports. As Figure 6 shows, China represents 28% of extra-EU imports of FDPs
and is thus ranked as the most important extra-EU supplier of FDPs to Italy. The
15
US follow with a share of 12% while Switzerland’s share is lower, at 8%. These
three countries account for roughly 50% of imports of FDPs from extra-EU coun-
tries while other countries such as Ukraine or Russia account for 6% and 4%, respec-
tively. In terms of sectoral composition, computers, electronic and optical products
is the sector with the highest import share of FDPs in extra-EU imports as high-
lighted in Figure A3. While this share reaches 21% for that sector, metallurgy and
chemicals represent the two other most relevant sectors with shares reaching 16%
and 11%, respectively.
3.3.2 Firms and FDPs
We now rely on balance-sheet data to provide four stylized facts on the character-
istics of firms importing foreign-dependent products. In our data, there are 17,385
importers of FDPs, i.e. about 2% of the firms in the balance sheet data.
Firms importing FDPs account for 31% (51%) of total Italian (manufacturing)
value-added. On the other hand, firms importing FDPs from high-risk countries
account for 15% (24%) of total Italian (manufacturing) value-added.26
As shown in the previous section, China is by far the most relevant source of
FDPs. In fact, the value-added produced by firms importing FDPs from China cor-
responds to 11% of total Italian value-added, while this figure reaches 20% in the
manufacturing sector. Interestingly, these figures are very close to those coming
from the Bank of Italy business survey despite the methodological differences.27
Fact 1: Firms importing FDPs account for a sizable share of the economy.
To understand the importance of FDPs for firms, we compute the share of im-
ports of FPDs in firms’ total purchases of goods and services. These statistics are
described in Table 1. As can be seen in the first row, on average FDPs account for
about 5% of firms’ total purchases. However, this reflects substantial heterogene-
ity as the median is 0.5% and the 90th percentile is 13%. From the point of view
of Italy, however, diplomatic ties with Switzerland and the U.S. are stronger than
those with other countries, e.g. China, or even Russia. The risk of supply disruption
are higher when countries have weaker ties and different political stances on key
26These firms span various industries and 50% of these firms can be found in four different sec-
tors: 34% of these firms can be found in the wholesale industry, 6% operate in the manufacture of
machinery and equipment, while 6% and 5% mainly produce computers, and electronic and optical
products, and textiles, respectively. Moreover, as Figure A4 shows, a larger share of firms import-
ing FDPs is located in Northern Italy, consistent with the well documented North-South economic
divide (Boeri et al., 2021).
27Indeed, firms directly importing inputs deemed as critical for the production process from China
through arm’s length relations or via intra-firm trade account for 11% of total Italian value-added
—17.4% for manufacturing firms. The survey (customs) data refer to 2022 (2019).
16
Table 1: Summary Statistics for FDP Importers
Mean p10 p50 p90 SD Obs.
FDPs, share of firms’ total purchases 4.81 0.01 0.53 13.10 14.60 17,385
FDPs from low-risk countries, share of firm’s total purchases 3.25 0.00 0.26 8.11 9.29 12,489
FDPs from high-risk countries, share of firm’s total purchases 5.09 0.04 0.88 14.17 11.29 8,102
Notes: The table displays summary statistics for firms importing foreign dependent products in 2019. The variables are
expressed in percentage points. Intermediate goods refer to expenditures on goods and services.
Table 2: Summary Statistics for FDPs
Mean Min p10 p50 p90 p99 max Obs.
# FDPs for each firm 2.46 1 1 1 5 15 110 17,385
# Non-FDPs for each firm 15.77 1 1 3 39 194 1,380 65,403
# source countries, FDP ×firm 1.34 1 1 1 2 5 60 42,753
# source countries, # Non-FDPs ×firm 1.42 1 1 1 2 7 46 1,031,683
Notes: The table displays summary statistics for foreign dependent products imports in 2019.
issues. To take this dimension into account, we further distinguish between “high-
risk” and “low-risk” countries. The next two rows of Table 1 show that the FDP
share from high-risk and low-risk countries averages 5% and 3%, respectively.28,29
Fact 2: FDPs, on average, account for a modest share of firms’ total purchases.
We then dig deeper into firms’ sourcing strategies. Firms purchase few FDPs, 2.5
on average, compared to 16 non-FDPs. Table 2 shows that these figures are higher in
the right tail of the distribution, reaching a maximum of 110 for FDPs. The median
number of sourcing countries for each firm-FDP pair is 1, while around 10% of firms
purchase the same FDP from at least 2 different countries. These figures are similar
to those observed for non-FDPs.30
Fact 3: Diversification of sourcing is limited for FDPs.
To assess whether there are differences between importers of FDPs and non-
28The number of firms reported in the second and third row need not add up to that reported on
the first row as firms import from both friends and enemies. For 19 observations out of 17,385, the
shares exceed 100% and we thus winsorize them at 100%.
29Following Javorcik et al. (2022), high-risk countries are defined as those that on the UN Gen-
eral Assembly resolution of 23 February 2023 on peace in Ukraine voted differently from the main
Western countries, including Italy. We note that the average ratio of imports of FDPs from high-
risk countries to total imports of FDPs is sizable (38%), but its distribution is bimodal and heavily
concentrated as shown in Figure A5. This suggests that sourcing is not diversified.
30As shown in Table A1, firms tend to source more FDPs from low-risk countries only (66%, vs
27% from high-risk countries only), while a very modest share is sourced from both country groups
(7.5%). Even if this latter share seems rather modest, it is higher than the one for non-FDPs products
(5%). However, the value of FDPs sourced both from low- and high-risk countries accounts for
almost half of the total value of purchased FDPs by Italian firms (47%).
17
importers of such products, we estimate the following regression:
log yi=γ+βForeign Dependenti+δs+εi (4)
where iis a firm, yiis employment, turnover, wages or labor productivity measured
as the ratio of value-added to the number of employees. Foreign Dependentiis a
dummy variable equal to one if firm iimports foreign-dependent products. We fur-
ther control for differences in demand or supply that could explain size differences
across firms as well as the fact that firms in specific industries may need FDPs for
their production process by including four-digit industry fixed effects δs.
Table 3 presents our results. As shown in Panel A, firms importing foreign-
dependent products are larger than non-importers of FDPs. To fix ideas, column 1
shows that importers of FDPs have 470% more employment, 2400% more turnover,
give 70% higher wages and are 80% more productive than non-importers of such
products.31These size differences remain even when comparing firms within nar-
rowly defined industries. A concern, however, is that these premia mostly reflect
size differences across importers and non-importers (Bernard et al., 2007). To ad-
dress this concern, Panel B focuses on size differences across firms importing from
extra-EU countries —these firms are arguably larger than other types of importers
since fixed costs associated with sourcing from outside the EU may be larger. While
the point estimates are smaller, they remain highly significant and the size differ-
ences remain important: column 8, for instance, shows that importers of FDPs are
20% more productive than non-importers of FDPs conditional on sourcing from
extra-EU partners.32
Fact 4: Firms importing FDPs are larger and more productive.
3.4 Discussion
3.4.1 Level of aggregation
To better understand the importance of identifying FDPs using granular data, we
use our methodology at the HS6 product code level instead.33In column 1 of Ta-
ble 4, we report the number of FDPs identified at the HS8 level for the sake of
31This is calculated as (exp(X)−1)∗100 where Xis the point estimate reported in Table 3.
32In a more demanding specification, we include a control for the number of imported products
to account for the fact that firms importing FDPs may be larger because they need more foreign
goods to operate. Table A2 shows that the results remain positive in all specifications but one. The
point estimates, however, are not significant for wages but are significant at the 10% level for labor
productivity within narrowly defined industries as shown in column 8.
33As there is a one-to-one mapping from HS8 codes to HS6 codes, we rely on our customs data
and compute all the criteria discussed in Section 3.2 at the HS6 level.
18
Table 3: FDP Premia
log Employment log Turnover log Wages log Labor Productivity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Panel A. All firms
Import FDP 1.736*** 1.551*** 3.205*** 2.545*** 0.512*** 0.336*** 0.596*** 0.383***
(0.013) (0.012) (0.014) (0.014) (0.003) (0.004) (0.006) (0.006)
Obs. 552,620 552,598 753,461 753,429 549,452 549,430 528,004 527,986
Panel B. Extra-EU importers
Import FDP 0.870*** 0.950*** 1.270*** 1.283*** 0.163*** 0.167*** 0.183*** 0.180***
(0.015) (0.014) (0.017) (0.016) (0.004) (0.004) (0.007) (0.007)
Obs. 58,152 58,107 63,035 62,991 58,082 58,036 56,309 56,263
4-digit industry FE No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes
Notes: The table reports estimates from eq. (4) in the text. Standard errors clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
Table 4: Vulnerabilities at Different Levels of Aggregation
FDPs (HS8) FDPs with HS6 Data FDPs from HS6 Data FDPs from HS8 Data Merged HS8 Codes
Number 515 500 139 154 361
Notes: This table displays the number of foreign dependent products (FDPs) identified using trade data at different levels of aggregation.
Column 1 reports the number of FDPs identified through our baseline procedure. Column 2 reports the number of HS8 product codes
recovered from the 324 vulnerable HS6 product codes identified using more aggregate data (HS6 level). Columns 3-4 and 5 report the
number of HS8 codes unmatched and matched, respectively.
comparison. In column 2, we rely on the 324 HS6 codes identified using more ag-
gregate data and map them to all corresponding HS8 product codes. This results in
500 FDPs identified when we conduct our analysis at a lower level of aggregation.
We then proceed to merging the list of FDPs identified in the first two columns. The
resulting merge is reported in the last three columns. Columns 3 and 4 show that
139 and 154 FDPs are identified using HS6 and HS8 data and these product codes
do not perfectly overlap. Importantly, some key FDPs such as semiconductors (HS4
code 8542) are not identified when using HS6 data to identify FDPs. The last col-
umn shows that 361 HS8 codes can be matched. Overall, this lends further support
to the importance of relying on granular data to identify import vulnerabilities (Jar-
avel and M ´ejean, 2020).
3.4.2 Granularity of demand or granularity of supply?
Our methodology identifies foreign-dependent products from the point of view of
Italian demand. Other authors, on the other hand, have put forth the importance of
considering the supply-side (Korniyenko et al., 2017). The idea is that some goods
that we identify as FDPs for Italy may not be FDPs for other countries as this de-
pends on their own sourcing strategies.
19
Figure 7: Granularity of Supply
Notes: The figure displays the values of the HHI constructed using Italian imports at the HS6 level
(y-axis) and of the HHI constructed using exports of each country to the rest of the world (x-axis).
While our approach is best-suited as we are interested in understanding Italian
vulnerabilities, we further consider how accounting for the concentration of suppli-
ers of each product could affect our list of FDPs. To do so, we aggregate data at the
HS6 level, as this is the only level of aggregation available using harmonized data
across countries. We thus rely on BACI (Gaulier and Zignago, 2010) and measure
export concentration for each HS6 product.
We identify 324 FDPs when using data at the HS6 level. Figure 7 shows that
out of these 324 FDPs, 49 products are heavily concentrated on the export-side as
the HHI index associated with the export-side is larger than 40%. Out of these 49
products (82 HS8 codes), 30 are mostly exported by China while the US are the main
exporter for 5 of these FDPs.
This finding suggests that our approach, if applied to other countries, may iden-
tify common FDPs for which the possibility of diversifying away from specific sup-
pliers may be low.
4 Risk-assessment: supply shortages of FDPs
In this section we adopt a stress-test approach and evaluate the effects of a disrup-
tion in the availability of FDPs on value added. We start by outlining our frame-
work before describing our results.
20
4.1 Model
4.1.1 Environment
Each firm iproduces output Ywith a Cobb-Douglas technology, by combining labor
(L), capital ( K), and intermediates goods and services ( M):
Yi=AiKαs
iLβs
iM1−αs−βs
i(5)
where αsandβsare industry-specific expenditure shares on labor and capital
while 1 −αs−βsis the expenditure share of goods and services purchases.
In turn, intermediate goods and services are combined through a firm-specific
CES aggregator:34
Mi=
γ1
σ
iEσ−1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σXσ−1
σ
iσ
σ−1
, (6)
where γiis firms’ goods and services expenditure share on FDPs E, whereas Xis
a bundle of non-foreign-dependent intermediate goods and services. Importantly,
σdenotes the elasticity of substitution between FDPs and other intermediates. As
usual with this type of production function, FDPs and non-FDPs become perfect
complements when σ=0, while the function becomes Cobb-Douglas when σ=1.
4.1.2 FDP disruption and value-added
We assume a firm-specific shock εireduces the availability of foreign-dependent
products E. Normalizing its original endowment to 1, expenditures on FDPs after
the shock are thus given by Ei=1−εi. After some derivations detailed in Ap-
pendix A, we obtain:
∆vai= (1−αs−βs) 
γ1
σ
i(1−εi)σ−1
σ+ (1−γi)1
σ
1−γi
γiσ−1
σσ
σ−1

γ1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σ
1−γi
γiσ−1
σσ
σ−1−1!
(7)
The change in value-added ∆vaidepends on the firm-specific shock εi, on the elas-
ticity of substitution σ, on the sectoral parameter 1 −αs−βsand on the firm-specific
parameter γi.
Lastly, we aggregate firm-level value-added changes at the industry level sand
34This formulation echoes Bachmann et al. (2022)’s approach to studying the effect of cutting en-
ergy imports from Russia.
21
at the aggregate level as follows:
∆vas=∑
i∈s∆vai×ωva
is (8)
∆va=∑
i∈s∆vai×ωva
i (9)
where ωva
isis firm i’s sectoral value-added share while ωva
iis firm i’s value-added
share in the economy.
Discussion. Despite its limitations —prices and factors of production other than
FDPs are held constant, we find the framework above to be useful for the follow-
ing reasons. First, the model can easily be calibrated using standard micro data
—which are typically available to researchers. Second, considering alternative de-
coupling scenarios or using alternative elasticity values is computationally conve-
nient as eq. (7) can be readily computed. Third, our framework can be used to
recover effects at different levels of aggregation —firms, regions, industries, aggre-
gate. Because of its limitations and advantages, we consider our framework to be
complementary to papers relying on Baqaee and Farhi (2023)’s work.35
4.2 Calibration
We calibrate our model by combining the customs data at the firm-product level
with the balance sheet data for 2019.
In our baseline scenario, we assume that geoeconomic fragmentation would dis-
rupt imports of FDPs sourced from high-risk countries. We thus compute the share
of FDPs sourced from high-risk countries in total imports of FDPs (risky sharei) and
allow this share to change according to the parameter δ∈[0.25, 0.75 ]. Therefore, the
firm-level shock is:
εi=risky sharei×δ (10)
In other words, we reduce the total firm-level endowment of foreign-dependent
products by a share that is proportional to its imports from risky countries. Our
baseline value for δis 0.5. Let us note that δnot only captures different degrees of
disruptions but also the ease of substitution between FDPs from high- and low-risk
countries.36
35They provide a flexible general equilibrium framework calibrated to aggregated input-output
tables.
36For instance, δ=−0.5 could result from either a 100% drop in the supply of FDPs, partially
mitigated by substituting 50% of this supply, or from a 50% drop in the supply of FDPs without any
substitution.
22
Table 5: FDP Disruptions and Value-Added Change (in %)
Mean SD p1 p10 p50 p90 p99 Obs.
σ=0.00 -33.12 15.08 -50.00 -50.00 -35.40 -6.52 -0.13 8,102
σ=0.02 -29.13 14.89 -49.27 -46.34 -31.54 -1.37 -0.00 8,102
σ=0.05 -22.86 13.75 -48.12 -40.40 -24.50 -0.30 -0.00 8,102
σ=0.10 -12.93 12.17 -46.07 -31.05 -9.83 -0.11 -0.00 8,102
σ=0.15 -8.10 10.44 -43.91 -23.81 -3.31 -0.07 -0.00 8,102
σ=0.20 -6.01 9.18 -41.73 -18.91 -1.78 -0.05 -0.00 8,102
σ=1.00 -2.69 5.84 -30.67 -7.55 -0.47 -0.02 -0.00 8,102
Notes: The table reports the value-added change (in %) induced by a 50% cut in
foreign-dependent inputs from high-risk countries. We include all firms importing
FDPs from high-risk countries.
Finally, given the central role of σ—see footnote 43 —and to reflect the uncer-
tainty about its value, we allow this parameter to vary from 0 to 1. However, since
our focus is on the short-run effects of decoupling, the elasticity of substitution be-
tween intermediates is arguably closer to zero (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Atalay,
2017; Boehm et al., 2019).37
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Heterogeneous effects across firms
In Table 5, we report the firm-level changes in value-added following a 50% cut
in FDPs from high-risk countries for selected levels of σ. Around 8,000 firms are
exposed to this shock. The impact varies widely across firms conditioning on σand
for different values of σ. Indeed, the median impact ranges from -35% when the
intermediate bundle is obtained with a Leontief function ( σ=0), to -0.5% in the
Cobb-Douglas case ( σ=1). Moreover, when σ=0.1, the drop ranges from 46% for
firms in the bottom percentile to 0.1% for firms in the ninetieth percentile.
We visually inspect these results by focusing on manufacturing firms only (about
4,300), in Figure 8. It is clear that when σapproaches zero, the distribution tends to
be more concentrated towards more negative values, while as σincreases the mass
flattens out and then moves towards zero.
4.3.2 Aggregate effects
We aggregate our firm-level results using eq. (9) and plot them in Figure 9. In the
case where FDPs cannot be substituted with non-FDP inputs, a 75% cut in the sup-
37Peter and Ruane (2023) find values for the elasticity of substitution between intermediates con-
sistently higher than one. Their estimates, however, are long-run ones in that they focus on India’s
trade liberalization episode.
23
Figure 8: Distribution of Value-Added Change (in %)
0.05.1.15.2.25 
−50 −40 −30 −20 −10 0
Value−added drop
sigma=0.00 sigma=0.02 sigma=0.05
sigma=0.10 sigma=0.15 sigma=0.20
Notes: The figure reports the distribution of value-added changes (in %) due to a 50% cut in FDPs
from high-risk countries. We include manufacturing firms only.
Figure 9: Aggregate Value-Added Change (in %) across Scenarios
−3−2−10% change in total value−added
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
25% cut 50% cut 75% cut
ply of FDPs from high-risk countries is associated with a drop in total Italian value-
added of more than 3%. On the other hand, halving the supply of FDPs from these
countries would generate a drop in value-added up of 2%. A small drop of 25%
would lead to a one percent drop in value-added.
Regional- and sectoral-level impacts vary substantially. First, even if most of the
firms exposed to a cut in the supply of FDPs from high-risk countries are found in
24
Figure 10: Aggregate Value-Added Change (in %) across Regions
%VA drop
(−5, −4)
(−4, −3)
(−3, −2)
(−2, −1)
(−1, 0)
Notes: The figure reports the value-added change (in %) across regions coming from a 50% drop in
FDP supply from high-risk countries ( σ=0).
the Northern regions (Figure A6), the potential impact of the shock on two Central
regions – Marche and Tuscany – is the highest (Figure 10).38This suggests that
focusing solely on customs data and on the location of firms would provide an
inaccurate perspective of the relative regional exposure. Instead, it is crucial to take
into account firms’ characteristics obtained from balance sheet data.
Second, there is even more heterogeneity across sectors than across regions. Fig-
ure 11 shows that the impact of the shock in the Leontief case would exceed 11%
for the wearing apparel and leather products and electrical and non-electric do-
mestic appliances industries, and would be higher than 8% for the other textiles,
pharmaceutical products and computers, electronic and optical products indus-
tries. These effects are considerably higher than the result obtained for the entire
economy (2.2%), reflecting the higher share of FDPs from high-risk countries used
by these industries.
38We present results in the Leontief case where σ=0, for the sake of simplicity. Results for
alternative values of σare available upon request.
25
Figure 11: Aggregate Value-Added Change (in %) across Sectors
-12.0 -9.0 -6.0 -3.0 0.0Retail tradeMotor vehicles, trailers, and semitrailersWholesale tradeOther transport equipmentChemicals and chemical productsBasic metalsRental and leasing activitiesProgramming and broadcasting activitiesOther manufacturingLeather and related productsComputer, electronic, and optical productsPharmaceutical productsOther textilesElectrical and non-electric domestic appliancesWearing apparel and leather products
Notes: The figure reports the value-added change (in %) across the most exposed sectors from a
50% drop in FDP supply from high-risk countries. Red (blue) bars refer to manufacturing (services)
industries. σranges from 0 (lower bound of the impact reported in the chart) to 0.5 (upper bound of
the impact reported in the chart).
4.4 Additional results
4.4.1 Disruptions of FDPs coming from different countries
We consider other scenarios in Figure A7. Halving the supply of FDPs from low-
risk countries outside the EU would have a higher impact on the Italian economy.
Instead, halving the supply of FDPs from China would imply a drop in value-added
close to that obtained when reducing the entire supply of FDPs from high-risk
economies. This can be explained by the central role of China as a supplier of these
products. We consider a more extreme scenario —75% shock on manufacturing
firms —in Figure A8. The decrease in value-added from a cut in the supply from
China would amount to 4.5% in the Leontief case.39
4.4.2 Aggregation level and aggregate effects
Lastly, we investigate how relying on more aggregated data (at the HS6-level) would
affect our quantitative results. To do so, we assess the impact of a cut in the supply
of the 500 FDPs identified in Section 3.4.1. It turns out that the aggregate impact
is close to what we previously estimated (Figure A9). This, however, masks het-
erogeneity across sectors. As reported in Figure A10, the exposure of two indus-
tries —leasing and rental services, other transport equipment —is overstated by
39Interestingly, this figure is close to what we documented using the firm-level survey. Indeed,
almost 5% of total manufacturing value-added is highly exposed to disruptions, i.e., manufacturing
firms directly sourcing from China inputs they deem critical for their activity with limited substitu-
tion possibilities that they are neither implementing nor planning.
26
more than 1 p.p., while those of five industries are understated by the same magni-
tude.40,41
The bias is more substantial if we instead consider 3-digit sectors rather than
firms. Overall, conditional on σ, aggregate data overstate the exposure to supply
shocks. For instance, in the case of a 50% cut in the supply of FDPs, the results ob-
tained with aggregated data would be 7 p.p. higher in the Leontief case compared
to the estimate obtained with firm-level data (Figure A12). This bias decreases as σ
increases and becomes almost negligible for σ>0.2.42
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we identify foreign-dependent products for the Italian economy and
exploit micro data to provide a risk-based assessment of potential supply disrup-
tions from high-risk countries. In doing so, we propose a framework to obtain quan-
titative estimates of the impact of supply disruptions of foreign dependent products
on value added at different levels of aggregation. We find that firms, sectors, and
regions are highly exposed to this supply shock. We also document that the impact
on value added is highly heterogeneous. We argue that microdata are crucial for
these exercises, especially when complementarities in production are strong.
References
AIYAR , M. S., M. J. C HEN , C. E BEKE , M. C. H. E BEKE , M. R. G ARCIA -SALTOS ,
T. G UDMUNDSSON , M. A. I LYINA , M. A. K ANGUR , T. K UNARATSKUL , M. S. L.
RODRIGUEZ ,ET AL . (2023): Geo-economic fragmentation and the future of multilater-
alism , International Monetary Fund.
ANTR `AS, P. AND D. C HOR (2022): Global value chains , Elsevier, chap. 5, 297–376.
ARJONA , R., W. C ONNELL ,AND C. H ERGHELEGIU (2023): “An enhanced method-
ology to monitor the EU’s strategic dependencies and vulnerabilities,” Tech. rep.,
Chief Economist Team at the Directorate-General for Internal Market . . . .
40These are the tobacco industry, programming and broadcasting activities, other textiles, furni-
ture, paper and paper products.
41We also proceed to simulate a cut in the supply of FDPs for which supply is concentrated at
the global level —in the spirit of Section 3.4. Figure A11 shows that the estimates closely align with
our baseline results, indicating that a concentrated global supply poses a significant concern for the
most relevant FDPs.
42Forσ=0.05, the impact doubles in size for aggregated data compared to firm-level data, while
in the Leontief case it is almost five-fold Figure A13).
27
ATALAY , E. (2017): “How important are sectoral shocks?” American Economic Jour-
nal: Macroeconomics , 9, 254–280.
ATTINASI , M. G., L. B OECKELMANN ,AND B. M EUNIER (2023): “The economic
costs of supply chain decoupling,” .
BACHMANN , R., D. B AQAEE , C. B AYER , M. K UHN , A. L ¨OSCHEL , B. M OLL, A. P E-
ICHL , K. P ITTEL ,AND M. S CHULARICK (2022): “What if? The economic effects
for Germany of a stop of energy imports from Russia,” Tech. rep., ECONtribute
Policy Brief.
BAQAEE , D. AND E. F ARHI (2023): “Networks, Barriers, and Trade,” Econometrica ,
forthcoming.
BARROT , J.-N. AND J. SAUVAGNAT (2016): “Input specificity and the propagation of
idiosyncratic shocks in production networks,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics ,
131, 1543–1592.
BERNARD , A. B., J. B. J ENSEN , S. J. R EDDING ,AND P. K. S CHOTT (2007): “Firms in
international trade,” Journal of Economic perspectives , 21, 105–130.
BOEHM , C. E., A. F LAAEN ,AND N. P ANDALAI -NAYAR (2019): “Input linkages
and the transmission of shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 T ¯ohoku earth-
quake,” Review of Economics and Statistics , 101, 60–75.
BOERI , T., A. I CHINO , E. M ORETTI ,AND J. P OSCH (2021): “Wage equalization and
regional misallocation: evidence from Italian and German provinces,” Journal of
the European Economic Association , 19, 3249–3292.
CALIENDO , L. AND F. P ARRO (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
NAFTA,” The Review of Economic Studies , 82, 1–44.
CHEPELIEV , M., M. M ALISZEWSKA , I. O SORIO -RODARTE , M. S EARA E P EREIRA ,
AND D. V ANDERMENSBRUGGHE (2022): “Pandemic Climate Mitigation, and
Reshoring : Impacts of a Changing Global Economy on Trade, Incomes,and
Poverty,” .
EPPINGER , P., G. J. F ELBERMAYR , O. K REBS ,AND B. K UKHARSKYY
(2021): “Decoupling Global Value Chains,” CESifo Working Paper , sSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3848341 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3848341.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION (2021): “Strategic dependencies and capacities,” Commis-
sion Staff Working Document , 352.
28
FELBERMAYR , G., H. M AHLKOW ,AND A. S ANDKAMP (2023): “Cutting through the
value chain: The long-run effects of decoupling the East from the West,” Empirica ,
50, 75–108.
GAULIER , G. AND S. Z IGNAGO (2010): “Baci: international trade database at the
product-level (the 1994-2007 version),” .
GIAMMETTI , R., L. P API, D. T EOBALDELLI ,AND D. T ICCHI (2021):
“The Network Effect of Deglobalisation on European Regions,” SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3988744 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3988744.
G´OES, C. AND E. B EKKER (2022): “ The Impact of Geopolitical Conflicts on Trade,
Growth, and Innovation,” World Trade Organization, Staff Working Paper .
HOUTHAKKER , H. S. (1955): “The Pareto distribution and the Cobb-Douglas pro-
duction function in activity analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies , 23, 27–31.
IOANNOU , D., J. J. P ´EREZ , H. G EEROMS , I. V ANSTEENKISTE , P.-F. W EBER , A. M.
ALMEIDA , I. B ALTEANU , I. K ATARYNIUK , M. G. A TTINASI , K. B UYSSE ,ET AL .
(2023): “The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a Central Banking Perspec-
tive. Challenges to the Monetary Policy Landscape from a Changing Geopolitical
Environment,” .
JARAVEL , X. AND I. M ´EJEAN (2020): “A data-driven resilience strategy in a global-
ized world,” Notes du conseil danalyse economique , 64, 1–12.
JAVORCIK , B., L. K ITZMUELLER , H. S CHWEIGER ,AND A. Y ILDIRIM (2022): “Eco-
nomic costs of friend-shoring,” .
JOHNSON , R. C. AND G. N OGUERA (2017): “A portrait of trade in value-added over
four decades,” Review of Economics and Statistics , 99, 896–911.
JONES , C. I. (2005): “The shape of production functions and the direction of techni-
cal change,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 120, 517–549.
KORNIYENKO , M. Y., M. P INAT ,AND B. D EW(2017): Assessing the fragility of global
trade: The impact of localized supply shocks using network analysis , International Mon-
etary Fund.
LIM, B., J. Y OO, K. H ONG ,AND I. C HEONG (2021): “ Impacts of Reverse Global
Value Chain (GVC) Factors on Global Trade and Energy Market,” Energies , 14.
OECD (2020): “Shocks, risks and global value chains: insights from the OECD
METRO model,” .
29
PETER , A. AND C. R UANE (2023): “The aggregate importance of intermediate input
substitutability,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
WU, J., J. W OOD ,AND X. H UANG (2021): “How does GVC reconstruction affect
economic growth and employment? Analysis of USA–China decoupling,” Asian-
Pacific Economic Literature , 35, 67–81.
30
Appendix
A Derivations
The CES aggregator combining intermediate goods and services given by
Mi=
γ1
σ
iEσ−1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σXσ−1
σ
iσ
σ−1
gives us the following cost-minimization problem:
min
Ei,XipEEi+PXXi
s.t.
γ1
σ
iEσ−1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σXσ−1
σ
iσ
σ−1
≥Mi
The first-order conditions yield:
pE=λγ1
σ
iE−1
σ
iM1
σ
i(11)
and
pX=λ(1−γi)1
σX−1
σ
iM1
σ
i(12)
where λis the associated Lagrange multiplier. Taking the ratio of the two first-order
conditions, one gets:
pE
pX=γi
1−γi1
σEi
Xi−1
σ
(13)
Solving for FDPs yields:
Xi=pE
pXσ1−γi
γiEi (14)
We take a partial equilibrium point of view in that relative prices are normalized to
one and so is the supply of non-FDPs Ei. The supply of FDPs is then pinned down
by the expenditures shares γi.
Plugging this term and the fact that Eiis normalized to one prior to the shock
yields:
Mi="
γ1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σ1−γi
γiσ−1
σ#σ
σ−1
Given that expenditures on FDPs are given by (1−εi)after the shock, the change
31
inMis:43
∆Mi
Mi=
γ1
σ
i(1−εi)σ−1
σ+ (1−γi)1
σ
1−γi
γiσ−1
σσ
σ−1

γ1
σ
i+ (1−γi)1
σ
1−γi
γiσ−1
σσ
σ−1−1 (15)
We assume that Kand Lare fixed in the short-run. Proxying ∆mwith∆M
M, the
log change in production can be recovered from eq. (5):
∆yi= (1−αs−βs)∆mi (16)
From the Cobb-Douglas production function specified in eq. (5), expenditure
shares on goods and services are pinned down by the Cobb-Douglas exponents,
i.e., pMMi/pYYi= (1−αs−βs). Value-added can thus be expressed as VA i=
pYYi−pMMi=pYYi−(1−αs−βs)pYYi. Normalizing the price of the output
good to unity, we obtain:
∆vai=∆yi (17)
Combining eq. (15), eq. (16), and eq. (17) yields the firm-level impact of a reduc-
tion in FDPs on value-added given by eq. (7) in the text.
43When σ=0,∆Mi
Mi=−εi. Conversely, when σ=1,∆Mi
Mi=1−γ
γ1−γi(1−εi)γi
1−γ
γ1−γi−1.
32
B Additional Figures
Figure A1: Exposure to China, by sector (share of sectoral employment and value-
added)
5 
  
Fig 3a Firms sourcing critical inputs from 
China  (share of total firms)  Fig 3b Exposure  to China  (share of total 
employment  and value -added)  
   
Source and notes: own elaboration on INVIND data. Fig 3a shows the share of firms in manufacturing and services sourcing  
critical input s from China and the import channel. Fig. 3b shows the  share of employment and value-added accounted for 
by firms sourcing  critical input s from Chin a. Data are weighted to provide results that are representative of the entire 
population.  
 
 
Fig 4 Exposure to China , by sector (share of sectoral employment and value -added)  
 
Source and notes: o wn elaboration on INVIND data. For each sector , the figure shows the share of employment 
and value -added accounted for by firms sourcing  critical input s from China. Data are weighted to provide results 
that are representative of the entire population.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: own elaboration on INVIND data.
33
Figure A2: Number of foreign-dependent products by country
Notes: The bars represent the number of foreign dependent products (FDPs) by country. The x-axis
represents the main exporter of each FDP .
Figure A3: Extra-EU Import Share of Foreign-Dependent Products by Sector
Notes: The bars represent the share of each sector’s imports of foreign dependent products (FDPs)
in Italian imports of FDPs.
34
Figure A4: Importers of FDPs by Region
Notes: This map represents the number of firms importing foreign dependent products (FDPs) by
Italian regions.
Figure A5: Distribution of the ratio of expenditures on FDPs from high-risk coun-
tries to total FDP expenditures
0510152025Density
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
FDPs from high−risk countries / total FDPs
35
Figure A6: % share of firms exposed to a cut in FDPs supply from high-risk coun-
tries
# share of exposed firms
1.6 − 2
1.2 − 1.6
.8 − 1.2
.4 − .8
0 − .4
36
Figure A7: Value-added change (in %) following a disruption of FDPs, 50% cut in
supply
−3−2−10% change in value−added
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
High−risk countries Extra−EU Low risk countries
China
Figure A8: Manufacturing value-added change (in %) following a disruption of
FDPs, 75% cut in supply
−10−8−6−4−20% change in value−added
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
High−risk countries Extra−EU Low risk countries
China
37
Figure A9: Value-added change (in %) following a 50% cut in FDPs from high-risk
countries, baseline vs HS6-digit for different values of σ
−2−1.5−1−.50% change in value−added
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
Baseline HS6 FDPs
Figure A10: Value-added change (in %) following a 50% cut in FDPs from high-risk
countries with σ=0, HS8 vs HS6 by sector
Tobacco
Other TextilePaper
Other transport equipmentFurniture
Programming and broadcasting
Leasing and rental
−12−8−40% Value−Added drop, Aggregate (HS6 FDPs)
−12 −8 −4 0
% Value−Added drop, Baseline (HS8 FDPs)
38
Figure A11: Value-added change (in %) following a 50% cut in supply from high-
risk countries, FDPs with high concentration of supply, total economy
−2.5−2−1.5−1−.50% change in total value−added
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
25% cut 50% cut 75% cut
Figure A12: Aggregation bias: % ∆VA from 3-digit industry-level - % ∆VA from
firm-level (baseline)
0246810Aggregation bias: firm vs industries, total
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
Elasticity of substitution
25% cut 50% cut 75% cut
39
Figure A13: Value-added change (in %) following a 50% cut in FDPs from high-risk
countries, firm-level vs industry-level for different values of σ
0.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.09.1.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.2.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.3.31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38.39.4.41.42.43.44.45.46.47.48.491
−2−1.5−1−.50% Value−Added drop, Baseline (firm−level)
−10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0
% Value−Added drop, Aggregate (industry−level)
40
C Additional Tables
Table A1: Summary Statistics for FDPs sourcing, by country-group
# of total Firms ×Product Share of total Firms ×Product Share of total imports
FDPs Non-FDPs FDPs Non-FDPs FDPs Non-FDPs
High-risk only 11,375 817,674 26.61 15.73 9.57 4.68
Low-risk only 28,175 162,239 65.90 79.26 43.13 61.36
Low-risk and High-Risk 3,203 51,770 7.49 5.02 47.30 33.96
Total 42,753 1,031,683 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
Notes: The table displays summary statistics for foreign dependent products imports in 2019.
41
Table A2: FDP Premia: Additional Robustness
log Employment log Turnover log Wages log Labor Productivity
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Import FDP 0.026* 0.054*** -0.056*** 0.039*** 0.006 0.002 0.010 0.013*
(0.015) (0.013) (0.015) (0.014) (0.005) (0.004) (0.008) (0.008)
Obs. 62,053 62,009 67,125 67,083 61,981 61,936 60,070 60,026
4-digit industry FE No Yes No Yes No Yes No Yes
Control for number of imported products Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Notes: The table reports estimates from eq. (4) in the text. Standard errors clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
significant at 1%. All columns include a control for the log of the number of imported products by each firm.
42
