C E N T R E
D ’ É T U D E S P R O S P E C T I V E S
E T D ’ I N F O R M A T I O N S
I N T E R N A T I O N A L E SNo 2013 – 24
August
D O C U M E N T D E T R A V A I L
Network Analysis of World Trade
using the BACI-CEPII dataset
L. De Benedictis, S. Nenci, G. Santoni, L. Tajoli, C. Vicarelli
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Table of contents
Highlights and Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Points clefs et r´ esum´ e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2. Visualizing World Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.1. Graphs and Networks: Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2. Graphs and networks: sociograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3. Zooming in and out trade data: Local and Global views . . . . . . . . . 21
3. Local and global centrality measures and relative countries’ position. . . . . . 22
3.1. Centrality measures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2. Global trade though centrality indexes lenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4. Sectoral Trade Networks: Bananas, Cement, Movies, Oil, Footwear and Engines. 39
4.1. Bananas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2. Cement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.3. Movies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.4. Crude Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5. Footwear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.6. Engines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.7. Centrality in sectoral data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6. Appendix: Data and indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7. Appendix: R, Stata and Pajek routines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7.1. Appendix: Calculating networks cumulative distributions in R. . . . . . . 53
7.2. Appendix: A brief note on Stata routines for network centrality measures . 54
7.3. Appendix: Pajek routines for network visualization . . . . . . . . . . . 54
2
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Network Analysis of World Trade
using the BACI-CEPII dataset
L. De Benedictis, S. Nenci, G. Santoni, L. Tajoli, C. Vicarelli
Highlights
This paper explores the World Trade using the Network Analysis and introduces the
reader to some of the techniques used to visualize, calculate and synthetically represent
network trade data.
The paper shows diﬀerent visualizations of the network and describe its topological
properties, producing and discussing some of the commonly used Network’s statistics,
and presenting some speciﬁc topics.
All in all, this paper shows that Network Analysis is a useful tool to describe bilat-
eral trade relations among countries when interdependence matters, and when trade
relations are characterized by high dimensionality and strong heterogeneity.
Abstract
In this paper we explore the BACI-CEPII database using Network Analysis. Starting from
the visualization of the World Trade Network, we then deﬁne and describe the topology of the
network, both in its binary version and in its weighted version, calculating and discussing some
of the commonly used network’s statistics. We ﬁnally discuss some speciﬁc topics that can
be studied using Network Analysis and International Trade data, both at the aggregated and
sectoral level. The analysis is done using multiple software (Stata, R, and Pajek). The scripts
to replicate part of the analysis are included in the appendix, and can be used as an hands-
on tutorial. Moreover,the World Trade Network local and global centrality measures, for the
unweighted and the weighted version of the Network, calculated using the bilateral aggregate
trade data for each country (178 in total) and each year (from 1995 to 2010,) can be downloaded
from the CEPII webpage.
JEL Classiﬁcation : F10
Keywords : International trade, Network Analysis, Density, Centrality, Stata, R, Pajek.
3
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Network Analysis of World Trade
using the BACI-CEPII dataset
L. De Benedictis, S. Nenci, G. Santoni, L. Tajoli, C. Vicarelli
Points clefs
Ce document applique la m´ ethode de l’analyse des r´ eseaux aux ﬂux du commerce inter-
national et introduit le lecteur aux techniques que cette m´ ethode utilise pour visualiser,
calculer et repr´ esenter de fa¸ con syst´ ematique les r´ eseaux du commerce international.
Il pr´ esente diﬀ´ erentes visualisations des r´ eseaux du commerce international et d´ ecrit
leurs propri´ et´ es topologiques.
Ce document montre que l’analyse des r´ eseaux est tr` es utile ` a la description et ` a la
compr´ ehension des interd´ ependances provenant des relations commerciales bilat´ erales
ainsi qu’` a l’analyse de ﬂux commerciaux ` a plusieurs dimensions et forte h´ et´ erog´ en´ eit´ e
R´ esum´ e
Dans ce document de travail, nous exploitons la base de donn´ es du commerce international
BACI, construite au CEPII, en utilisant la m´ ethode de l’analyse des r´ eseaux. Partant de la
visualisation du R´ eseau Mondial du Commerce International, nous d´ eﬁnissons et d´ ecrivons la
topologie de ce r´ eseau, ` a la fois dans sa version binaire et dans sa version pond´ er´ ee, puis nous
examinons les indicateurs statistiques du r´ eseau couramment utilis´ es. Nous discutons enﬁn des
sujets sp´ eciﬁques qui peuvent ˆ etre ´ etudi´ es en appliquant l’analyse des r´ eseaux au commerce
international, aux niveaux agr´ eg´ e et sectoriel. L’analyse est eﬀectu´ ee ` a l’aide de diﬀ´ erent logiciels
(Stata, R, et Pajek). Les scripts pour reproduire une partie de l’analyse ﬁgurent en annexe ; ils
peuvent ˆ etre utilis´ es pour se familiariser avec ce type d’analyse. Par ailleurs, les mesures de
centralit´ e mondiale et locale du R´ eseau Mondial du Commerce, dans les versions non pond´ er´ ee
et pond´ er´ ee du r´ eseau, calcul´ ees en utilisant l’ensemble des donn´ ees bilat´ erales de chaque pays et
pour chaque ann´ ee (de 1995 ` a 2010), peuvent ˆ etre t´ el´ echarg´ ees ` a partir du site web du CEPII.
Classiﬁcation JEL :F11, F14
Mots cl´ es : Commerce International, Analyse des R´ eseaux, Densit´ e, Centralit´ e, Stata,
R, Pajek
4
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Network Analysis of World Trade
using the BACI-CEPII dataset1
Luca De Benedictis*
Silvia Nenci
Gianluca Santoni
Lucia Tajoli§
Claudio Vicarelli¶
1. Introduction
At the beginning of this century, celebrating the centennial of Bertil Ohlin’s birth, Donald
Davis and David Weinstein, tracing the evolution of the research in international trade,
were praising for an empirical shift of the discipline (Davis and Weinstein, 2001).2In ten
years this shift is made.
The fundamental ingredients of this new empirical wave in international trade analysis
are the cross-fertilization of diﬀerent ﬁeld in economics, especially on empirical grounds;
the diﬀusion of econometrics in the background studies of the new generation of interna-
tional trade economists; and even more fundamental, the increasing availability of data
at the macro, sectoral and ﬁrm level suited for the analysis of international trade issues.
International institutions play an essential role in this respect. The United Nation system
(UN), the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Eurostat system, among
others, collect, produce and diﬀuse an enormous amount of internationally comparable
1This work has received ﬁnancial support by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
under the grant PRIN 2009 ”The international trade network: empirical analyses and theoretical mod-
els” (www.netrade.org). We would like to thank Giorgio Fagiolo, Massimo Riccaboni, Stefano Schiavo,
Gianluca Oreﬁce for the useful comments and Matthieu Crozet for the encouragement. All errors are our
responsibility.
*DED, University of Macerata, Via Crescimbeni 20, Macerata (MC), Italy, (debene@unimc.it)
DE, University of Roma Tre, Rome (RM), Italy, (silvia.nenci@uniroma3.it)
IE, S.Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa (PI), Italy, (g.santoni@sssup.it)
§Politecnico di Milano, Milan (MI), Italy, (lucia.tajoli@polimi.it)
¶ISTAT, Rome (RM), Italy, (cvicarelli@istat.it)
2Davis and Weinstein’s ﬁnal words are worth quoting: “ Crisp, lucid theory will always play a central
role in the ﬁeld. But this needs to be complemented by a serious encounter with data. ” “It is time for each
international economist to accept the challenge to make empirical analysis a central feature of our work
and dialogue. We have a world to discover. ”
5
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
data. This is a gold mine for empirical analysis. Restricting the focus to the speciﬁc
data we are going to work with, bilateral trade ﬂows are constantly collected at a very
detailed commodity level (6 digit Harmonized System) by the United Nations Statistical
Department, in the ComTrade database.3
Some research centers have recently started to produce their own variants of the original
database. The French research center CEPII ( Centre d’Etudes Prospectives d’Informations
Internationales ) is one of the ﬁrst that started oﬀering to the public the outcome (or
spin-oﬀ) of its research in terms of data. The BACI ( Base pour l’Analyse du Commerce
International ) dataset is one of these outcomes. The original motivation for producing
BACI is that, in spite of the richness of the data reported in ComTrade, the attempt to
account for highest number of countries, the largest period of time and the most disaggre-
gated product level is plagued by the too many missing ﬂows in the original UN database.
BACI uses a mirror statistic strategy to impute missing data (see Gaulier and Zignago
(2010) for a description of the data, the methodology used, and the comparison with other
databases). In general, the same 6-digit HS trade ﬂow should be reported by both the
exporting country i, as exports, and by the importing country j, as imports. Both ﬁgures
can be present, or missing, or just one of the two can be missing. In this last case, BACI
imputes the missing data using the mirror statistic reported by the trade partner. Using
a ‘reconciliation’ methodology,4(Gaulier and Zignago, 2010) BACI reduces the number of
missing values substantially, the remaining ones being those between two non-reporting
countries.
The BACI database is used overwhelmly in applied trade analysis.5It is rapidly diﬀusing
among scholars, it is constantly updated by the CEPII and it is largely available. In this
3The UN ComTrade database is the largest depository of international trade data available online. It
provides international (imports and exports) merchandise trade statistics for about 200 reporting coun-
tries from 1962 to 2012. The database contains detailed statistics reported by national statistical agencies,
and standardized by the UN Statistics Division, using the UN/OECD CoprA internal processing system.
Commodities are reported in the current classiﬁcation and revision (HS2002 in most cases) and are con-
verted all the way down to the earliest classiﬁcation SITC revision 1. Commodities are therefore classiﬁed
according to SITC (Rev.1 from 1962, Rev.2 from 1976 and Rev.3 from 1988), the Harmonized System
(HS) (from 1988 with revisions in 1996, 2002 and 2007) and Broad Economic Categories (BEC). Data
do not include ﬂows below 1,000 US dollars. Further information is included in the webpage of the UN
ComTrade statistics: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/Comtrade-User-Guide .
The IMF data would not be analyzed in this paper, however it is a feasible alternative. Just for
comparison, the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics database contains annual, quarterly and monthly time
series on merchandise imports and exports for 187 countries from 1981 to May 2012 (the most recent
monthly data available). The Historical Direction of Trade Statistics database covers years from 1948 to
1980.
4The methodology forces the reported ﬂow to be coherent when observed as import and as export. The
resulting data is therefore not suited for the analysis of trade smuggling based on the information derived
from the discrepancy between reported ﬂows (Fisman and Wei, 2004, 2009; Javorcik and Narciso, 2008;
Rotunno and V´ ezina, 2012).
5In December 2012 there were 451 papers quoting the BACI-CEPII database in scholar.google.com.
6
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
paper we explore the BACI dataset through the lenses of Network Analysis, visualizing
the World Trade Network, deﬁning and describing the topology of the network, producing
and discussing some of the commonly used Network’s statistics, and presenting some
speciﬁc topic that can be studied using the Network Analysis of relational or dyadic ( i j)
aggregated and sectoral international trade data. The analysis is done using multiple
software (Stata, R, and Pajek), and the scripts to replicate some sections of the analysis
are included in the appendix, and can be used as an hands-on tutorial to the network
analysis of trade ﬂows. Moreover, the World Trade Network local and global centrality
measures, for the unweighted and the weighted version of the Network, calculated using
the bilateral aggregate trade data for each country (178 in total) and each year (from
1995 to 2010) can be freely downloaded from the CEPII webpage.
Before entering in the details of the analysis, it is appropriate to answer a preliminary
question: why do we want to look at international trade data (as in the BACI-CEPII
database) using Network Analysis? What is so special about Network Analysis with
respect to other descriptive statistics generally used in applied international trade analysis
(Bowen, Hollander and Viaene, 2012)? The short answer is that, ﬁrst of all, networks are
about relations . The fundamental piece of information of networks is the dyad i j; not the
monads iorj, but the relationship between them. However, the speciﬁcity of networks is
that the relation between iand jis not analyzed in isolation, but it is studied focusing on
itsstructural dimension , that is taking into account the eﬀect of zin the relation between
iand j. Extending the eﬀect of others , or in our case the “ zcountry eﬀect,” to the many
zincluded in the set of possible trade relations, the resulting image is a network in its
essence. The implication of this “structural view” is that the relation between iand j
cannot be considered independent from the relation between iandz, and between jand
z. Therefore the characteristic of interdependence is the hinge of networks.
In general, the eﬀect of others could be reduced eventually to the“average eﬀect of others,”
as in the studies on peer eﬀects . In that case, the implicit assumption is that the peers
zs are somehow homogeneous, so that the mean is a meaningful central statistic of the
distribution of peers characteristics. However, this is generally not the case in social
networks, which are instead characterized by a high degree of heterogeneity and a power
law distribution of the topological properties of the network’s nodes. We will quantify the
country heterogeneity in the World Trade Network through the use of centrality measures.
This heterogeneity makes the case for the full structural analysis of the complete set of
relations in the network. This is what we will do in the next pages.
In one line, if the eﬀect of others on self is of marginal interest, there is no point of
bothering with network analysis. If on the contrary, structural interdependence and third
part’s ( z’s) eﬀects are of interest, here network analysis can be a fruitful complement to
more traditional research.
7
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Network Analysis has rapidly evolved in these recent years.6From the analysis of small
communities undertaken by sociologist and anthropologists, to the very large networks
studied by physicists and computer scientists; to the focus on Graph Theory mathemati-
cal models, to the empirical analysis of networks. The increasing availability of software
tools for the analysis, simulation and visualization of network data is boosting the em-
pirical side of the discipline.7Only mentioning the software used in subsequent analysis,
the Stata Graph Library ( SGL) has just been released by Miura (2012). It is suited for
directed orundirected one-mode networks containing arcs that are either unweighted (i.e.
bilateral trade partnership, in our case) or weighted (i.e. bilateral trade ﬂows). In spite of
the network jargon that will be clariﬁed in a little while, those characteristics are the ones
of the BACI trade data we will work with. Therefore we will make use of SGLin calculat-
ing the network statistics discussed in the paper. Computational ineﬃciency makes SGL
impractical for large networks. In this paper, the graph associated to the World Trade
Network G= (V,L)has an average dimension8of 178 vertices ( V=178) and 22,000
trade links ( L=22,000): it can be considered a medium-size network and can be safely
operationalized through SGL.
Since a while the R statistical computing environment (R Development Core Team, 2007)
witnessed the emergence of diﬀerent tools for the analysis of relational data. The igraph
library (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006), the network library (Butts, 2008a), the snalibrary
(Butts, 2008b), among others, have been collected under the umbrella of the statnet
library (Goodreau, Handcock, Hunter, Butts and Morris, 2008), while the tnet library as
been realized expressly do deal with weighted and longitudinal networks (Opsahl, 2009).
We use this tools to compare and integrate the results obtained through the SGLStata
routine. The advantages of using R are countless, and the capabilities of the R libraries
are far beyond the ones that are highlighted in this paper. The computational eﬃciency
ofigraph allows to work with very large networks (e.g. 1.8 million relations) and makes
it our preferred tool for the production of networks statistics distributions. The tnet
library as been used to calculate weighted networks statistics and to overcome the limits
6For an introduction to the evolving discipline of Network Analysis see Scott (2000), for a beautiful
recent introductory treatment of the topic see Newman (2010), and for a more technical treatment see
Wasserman and Faust (1994). Networks have also entered economic theory in recent years. See Vega-
Redondo (2007); Goyal (2009); Jackson (2010) for comprehensive overviews, and Zenou (2012) for a short
but illuminating introduction.
7The International Network for Social Network Analysis (INSNA) is listing in its webpage around twenty
software notiﬁed by INSNA Members. It is a large underestimate of the existing options available on
the web. For a selective overview of the tools available see Combe, Largeron, Egyed-Zsigmond and G´ ery
(2010).
8The BACI-CEPII data used in this paper includes a subset of countries. The more than 200 countries
included in the original database is therefore reduced to 178, including only the countries that where
reporting trade ﬂows for at least one international partner in allyears between 1995 and 2010. Some of
the measures that will be calculated in section 3 require the square matrix of yearly bilateral trade ﬂows
to be full-rank.
8
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
ofSGL.
Finally, the choice of making use of sociograms9lead us to take advantage of the graphic
capability of Pajek (de Nooy, Mrvar and Batagelj, 2011).10Data in Pajek format can
be read by both SGLand igraph and statnet . Therefore the BACI-CEPII dataset has
been converted in a Pajek format and all the visualizations included in the paper were
done with Pajek . Instead, the network statistics for the World Trade Network have been
calculated with SGL,igraph ,tnet andPajek .
This paper oﬀers a synthetic introduction to the application of Network Analysis to in-
ternational trade data, as collected by the Cepii in the BACI-CEPII database. The main
goal of the analysis is to introduce the reader to some of the techniques used to visualize,
calculate and synthetically represent network trade data.11We especially focus on central-
ity measures, as a way of describing the level of country heterogeneity in bilateral trade
ﬂows. We fully describe the centrality measures of the World Trade Network in 2007.
However, the interested reader could ﬁnd the full set of centrality measures between 1995
and 2010 in the CEPII databases page. Moreover, some of the scripts to calculate some
speciﬁc centrality measures using Stata ,RorPajek , or to reproduce some of the ﬁgures
presented in the paper, are available in the paper’s Appendix.
The structure of the paper is the following: in section 2 we present diﬀerent ways to visu-
alize the World Trade Network and present some general characteristics of the network;
in section 3 we deﬁne various centrality measures, and we derive them for the countries in
our sample; in section 4 we move from aggregate data to sectors, describing the structure
of the network for some selective products; Finally section 5 concludes.
2. Visualizing World Trade
If we look at the contemporary world trade the general impression that we receive is of
a signiﬁcant economic interaction among countries. Bilateral trade ﬂows show intense
and wide relations between countries, among which some stronger links emerge. A quite
natural visualization of trade ﬂows is though the use of a cartogram and of arrows linking
9What is called a sociogram, is now the classical visual representation of networks. It is a diagram, with
individuals (countries in our case) represented by vertices or nodes and their (social) relationship to one
another by links or lines or edges or arcs (trade ﬂows in our case). The sociogram was elaborated in the
1930s by the social psychologist Jacob Moreno (Moreno, 1934) and have been given some solid Graph
Theory bases by Cartwright and Harary (1977), the founders of modern social network analysis.
10Pajek (the Slovene word for spider) is a freeware program for the analysis and visualization of very
large networks. It is computationally eﬃcient and can be used for the calculus of networks statistics and
more.
11Being a simple technical introduction to the topic, the paper does not review the growing empirical
literature on the application of network analysis to international trade. For an overview of the literature
see Garlaschelli and Loﬀredo (2005), Kali and Reyes (2007), Fagiolo, Reyes and Schiavo (2008) and De
Benedictis and Tajoli (2011).
9
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
countries or geographical areas. One example is the the one oﬀered by Feenstra and Taylor
(2008) and reproduced in ﬁgure 1. It presents the geographical World map where arrows of
Figure 1 –
Map of World Trade in Goods, 2000 (US billion dollars)
Source : Feenstra and Taylor, 2008, Chapter 1.
Note : The thickness of links is proportional to the volume of trade. Intra-regional trade ﬂows are depicted by loops.
trade in merchandise goods are superimposed to the cartogram. By deﬁnition, the distance
between countries in ﬁgure 1 matches their geographical distance, and the curvature of
the arrows is purely esthetic. The picture is very eﬃcient in showing the intensity of
trade links between some countries and continents, highlighting some signiﬁcant trends:
(i) the leading role of Europe in world trade; (ii) the large amount of trade ﬂows at
regional level (within Europe, within the Americas and also between Asian countries);
(iii) a relevant trade link between the United States and Europe (about 35% of world
trade can be accounted for by these two trading partners); (iv) the important share of
world trade coming from Asia (exports from it totaled about one-quarter of global trade)
and its considerable trade links with both Europe and the United States; (v) the marginal
position of Africa (that accounts for only 2.5% of World trade), and its close relationship
with European countries.
Although suggestive, this picture does not give full account of the implication of the
interdependence among countries. To see why, let’s produce a similar ﬁgure using a
selection of the available information on the full set of bilateral trade ﬂows. Instead of
describing a limited number of countries or continents, as in ﬁgure 1, let’s plot the entire
set of 178 countries in our dataset according to geographical coordinates, drawing only
the two main export ﬂows for each country. The result is in ﬁgure 2.
10
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 2 –
Map of World Trade in Goods as a Geographical Network (major two export partners,)
2007.
Note : For each country, only the export ﬂows toward the ﬁrst and second trade partner are considered. Country labels
are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list of the countries included in the analysis). The position of
each country-node corresponds to the latitude and longitude coordinates of the centroid of the country main geographical
area. The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to the number of inﬂows. Diﬀerent colors correspond
to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek . The
sequence of Pajek commands necessary to reproduce the above ﬁgure is included in the Appendix.
Each country is represented by a node (or a vertex) in the network, labeled with the
respective iso3 country code (the entire list of countries, iso3 codes and respective geo-
graphical regions is included in the Appendix). Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent
continents or sub-continents. Since we are focusing only on the two main export markets
for each country, there are only two links (or arcs) directed from each country itoward
the two main export partners (e.g. Chile (CHL) is connected to the US (USA) and China
(CHN): those are its main export partners, on the other hand, Chile is not among the
major two export partners for any of the countries represented in ﬁgure 2). The size
of vertices is proportional to the number of incoming arcs: a large circle indicate that
the corresponding country is among the main partner for a large number of exporting
countries.
Apart from the diﬀerent reference year, and the data-selection strategy adopted to visual-
ize the way too large amount of information included in global bilateral trade, ﬁgure 1 and
ﬁgure 2 are conveying the same image of world trade. The US, Germany (DEU) and China
11
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
are the reference markets for a large number of countries, regional trade is substantial (e.g
Europe), some continents are largely disconnected (e.g. Africa and South America), other
geographical regions seem more connected (e.g. Oceania and East Asia). More generally,
the world trade system seems to be characterized by a high level of interconnectivity or
interdependence.
As we were saying, the geographical representation of international trade does not allow
to describe the eﬀect of this interdependence on each single country. To see why, let’s
proceed with the following thought experiment. Let’s imagine to delete an arc from ﬁgure
2: the link between Brazil (BRA) and the US (USA), for example. Nothing special will
happen to the whole picture. Just the circle corresponding to the US would become
marginally smaller, but from a structural point of view the rest of the picture will remain
unaltered: the position of countries, being ﬁxed by geography, is spatially unaﬀected, and
so is the position of the other arcs in the picture. Basically, the other countries’ trade is
unaﬀected by the sudden loss of Brazilian exports to the US. To borrow an expression
popularized by Anderson and vanWincoop (2003), it is as if the interdependence among
countries was only examined at the bilateral level instead of the multilateral level. The
same would happen if the link between Brazil and the US would have been substituted
by a new link between Brazil and Germany (DEU). Apart from the size of the circles
corresponding to the US and Germany nothing else would have changed in ﬁgure 2. This
is the visual analog of the assumption of conditional independence among dyads imposed
on international trade ﬂows.
Instead, if we want countries’ interactions to be accounted in determining the relative
position of each country in the whole trading system, we should get rid of the constraint
imposed by a geographical representation of international trade and move from physical
space to topological space . This is what we do next, using Network Analysis techniques
for the visualization of dyadic data.
Figure 3 is obtained relaxing the geographical constraint on the position of countries in
the trade network and applying what is called a force-directed algorithm (Kamada and
Kawai, 1989; Fruchterman and Reingold, 1991; de Nooy et al. , 2011) on the same data
used to produce ﬁgure 2. Colors, labels and the size of the circle of each country-node
are the same as before. Being simplistic, the algorithm acts as a balanced spring system
that minimizes the energy in the system. In other words, it is as if countries were linked
through springs: countries which are connected tend to stay close, while countries which
are not connected tend to be placed far apart. However, the position of each country does
not depend only on its bilateral links but also on the indirect eﬀect of others : the trade
partners of its trade partners will contribute to the determination of the country’s position
in the network. The sociogram allows to capture the multilateral eﬀect on bilateral ﬂows,
giving to every country a position relative to all the other countries in the trade network
and depending on the entire trading system. The beneﬁt that we receive from representing
12
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 3 –
The Network of World Trade in Goods (major two export partners,) 2007.
Note :For each country, only the export ﬂows toward the ﬁrst and second trade partner are considered. Country labels are
the iso3 country codes. The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to the number of inﬂows. Diﬀerent
colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn
using Pajek . The sequence of Pajek commands necessary to reproduce the above ﬁgure is included in the Appendix.
international trade as a network of trade ﬂows is therefore the possibility to visualize the
eﬀect of the relationship between the trading countries and the structure of the network
itself, revealing patterns that are diﬃcult to see using other approaches.
The network depicted in ﬁgure 3 is characterized by several features. Since we are ac-
counting for just the two major export markets for every country, no speciﬁc weight is
attached to the links, and the ﬁgure represents a directed unweighted (binary) network.
By construction there is no disconnected component in the network (i.e. no county or
group of countries is isolated from the rest of the network). As in ﬁgure 2 the size of the
circle corresponding to a country is proportional to the number of receiving links, and
is highly heterogeneous. In ﬁgure 3 highly connected nodes are generally placed at the
center of the network (i.e US, Germany, China and Japan (JAP), France (FRA) and the
UK (BGR)), while less well connected countries are placed at the hedges of the ﬁgure.
The structure of the network is both core-periphery and multipolar, with a leading role
played by the main European economies (on the upper right) and the United States (on
the bottom left). Japan (on the bottom centre) and the emerging economy of China hold
a notable position in the network, acting as the third pole. Ancillary to the United States
– and in some cases to China and other East and South Asian countries – is the position
13
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
of Latin American countries. On the other hand, Europe acts as an attractor for its close
neighbors of North Africa, while central African countries look at Asia as a possible al-
ternative. Former colonial links (or in general the role of history, e.g. common language,
common institutional structure) emerges clearly from the picture: francophone African
countries are close to France, while anglophone African countries are close to the UK.
Also the role of physical distance (together with regional trade agreements) is evident:
trade tends to be regionalized and countries sharing the same continental color tend to be
close together. Interesting is the position of some Central and Easter European countries,
such as Latvia (LVA), Lithuania (LTU) and Estonia (EST) that hold a peripheral position
but maintain preferential ties between them and with the nearest neighbors. It’s worth
nothing that – in spite of common perception – China and India hold a very diﬀerent
position both with respect to the US and in the network as a whole: although they both
are important players, however China can boast a more central position compared to India
(IND). Finally, the position of the United Kingdom is somehow peculiar, being located in
between the US and the rest of its fellows European countries. Its position is however not
right a the center of the network, depending not only on its direct links with the US and
Germany, but also on being a major partner for Canada (CAN), Turkey (TUR), Norway
(NOR), Kenya (KEN), Rwanda (RWA) and the Seychelles Islands (SYC). Those links are
forcing the UK into a more decentralized position. On the contrary, countries such as
Cambodia (KHM) and Bangladesh (BGD) are right at the center of the network, being
linked only to the US and Germany. The same happens for Israel (ISR), the Domini-
can Republic (DOM), and Sierra Leone (SLE) being linked only to the US and Benelux
(BLX). That means that the concept of centrality should not be automatically interpreted
as a “good thing”. In fact, being central could reﬂect both an eﬀective pivotal role or,
conversely, a condition of strong dependence on major players and the absence of feasible
alternatives.
To conclude, let’s go back to the previous thought experiment, and let’s delete again, now
from ﬁgure 3, the link between Brazil and the US. Something totally diﬀerent from the
previous case will happen. Not only the circle corresponding to the US would become
marginally smaller, but the position of many countries would be aﬀected by the fact that
Brazil is not exporting anymore to the US. Erasing the link with the US pushes Brazil
away from the US an towards Argentina and Paraguay (PRY). If now we substitute the
link between Brazil and the US with a new link between Brazil and Germany the whole
Southern Cone would move towards Europe. Contrary to ﬁgure 2, this is the visual analog
of the assumption of conditional interdependence among international trade ﬂows.
From the next section on we will consider the entire World Trade Network and not only
the two major export partners for each country. We will look at it as a directed network,
both in its unweighted (i.e. binary) and weighted (trade ﬂows) version.
14
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
2.1. Graphs and Networks: Basics
Let’s deﬁne the world trade network asgraph plus some extra-information. The graph
G= (V,L)describes the set of dyadic relations among the vertices. Since we always
work with the same number of countries, the Vdimension of the graph is V= (1, ...,
178), and N=178 is the total number of countries included in the analysis.12The number
of links changes year by year: in 2007 the link-dimension of the graph is L=(1, ...,
22002), where Mis the total number of existing links. The links are directed (i.e. arcs),
going from the exporting country, i, to the importing country, j, andLi j∈{0,1}. The
information included in Lis binary, and depicts the existence ( Li j=1) or non-existence
(Li j=0) of a trade link. If we add some more information on the link or the nodes, the
graph becomes a network: N= (G(V,L),W,P). The line value function Wincludes
all relevant characteristics of the edges, while the vertex value function Pincludes all
relevant characteristics of the nodes. The Wi jpositive elements in Wact as dyadic weights
onG, transforming the graph in a directed weighted network: where Wi jindicates the
strength of the link between country iand country j(e.g. export volume). Instead, P
includes country-speciﬁc values (e.g. label, income, geographical coordinates). Some of the
elements of the line and the vertex value functions are exogenous , like the ones indicated
in parenthesis, others are endogenously determined from the topological properties of the
network: the relative centrality of a node with respect to the structure of the network can
be included in the vertex value function as any other characteristic of a node.13
The trade network is characterized by high dimensionality and strong heterogeneity. The
22002 existing links in 2007 correspond to a density of the network of 0.7 (i.e the ra-
tio between the number of “realized” links and the number of maximum links possible),
indicating that taking two countries at random the probability of an existing trade link
among them is of 70%. It has evolved from around 50% in 1995 to the 68% of 2010, with
a remarkable drop during the the big trade collapse, as shown in ﬁgure 4.
This matches with a very strong heterogeneity among trade ﬂows: 25% of total world
trade is made of just 32 links of higher strength Wi j, involving only 17 countries; similarly,
50% of it is made of 158 links by 43 countries; 75% of it is made of 597 links by 76
countries; ﬁnally, 90% of total world trade is made of 1699 links (7.7% of total links) and
136 countries (76.4% of countries). More than 90% of bilateral trade ﬂows are of modest
relevance in their marginal contribution to world trade; at the same time one country out
of four is equally marginal in its contribution to world trade.14
12The complete list of countries included in the analysis is in the Appendix, together with iso3 codes
and geographical regions and geographical regions’ colors.
13General overviews of the formal descriptions of graphs and networks can be found in Wasserman and
Faust (1994), Newman (2010) and Jackson (2010). For an application to the World Trade Network see
De Benedictis and Tajoli (2011).
14See section 2.2 on this, especially ﬁgure 6 and the comment below.
15
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 4 –
Density, 1995-2010
19952000200520100.550.600.650.70
yeardensity
Note : Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The time-evolution of the density is drawn using R.
If the distribution of trade ﬂows among country-pairs (i.e the weighted network) appears
to be highly heterogeneous , similar heterogeneity is encountered also in trade partner-
ships (i.e. the unweighted network). Calling out-degree the number of out-going links
originated from country itowards its trade partners (direct trade partners deﬁne the
nearest neighborhood ofi), and in-degree the number of in-coming link to country i, it is
possible to plot the cumulative distributions of such degrees, as in ﬁgure 5. The in-degree
distribution is the one where some countries are identiﬁed by small circles: Italy, China
and the US have the maximum possible number of in-degrees, importing from all possible
countries in the database; Tunisia is importing from 132 countries; Congo from 92, and
so forth. The out-degree distribution (with no countries identiﬁed) shows that the per-
centile of countries that trade with a high number of partners is higher for exports than
for imports.
Both distributions are power-law (Clauset, Shalizi and Newman, 2009), and this is even
more evident when the distributions are plotted on a log-log scale as in the framed inset
in ﬁgure 5 (see also Riccaboni and Schiavo (2010) on this point). Even if most “laws” in
economics are power-laws, this is a crucial ﬁnding. Extending an argument fully explored
by Gabaix (2009, 2011), when the distribution of countries is fat-tailed, the central limit
16
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 5 –
Countries’ Out-degree and In-degree in 2007: Cumulative Distribution
0501001502000.00.20.40.60.81.01.2
in-degree and out-degreecumulative frequency
US / China / ItalyCongo
TunisiaMicronesia
Uganda
1251020502000.050.200.50
Note : The whole set of trade ﬂows has been used in calculating the in-degree (the red continuous line with circles indicating
some speciﬁc countries: US/China/Italy, etc.) and out-degree (the blue line) distributions. The inset show the same data
on a log-log scale. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The distribution is drawn using R ( igraph ).
theorem breaks down, and idiosyncratic shocks to heavily connected countries explain a
non-trivial fraction of aggregate world ﬂuctuations.
2.2. Graphs and networks: sociograms
A further issue related to the high dimensionality of the World Trade Network regards the
use of a sociogram as a visual tool. The possibility of drawing a network similar to the one
in ﬁgure 3 including the full set of 22002 links is precluded by the excessive numerosity
in the link-dimension. The resulting picture would not convey any clear information. In
producing ﬁgure 3 we used a compression scheme on network tie strength, operating on
the line value function Wand including for every country ionly the two out-ﬂows of
higher strength (i.e out-strength ) with a weight Wi j=1, and imposing a weight Wi j=0
on all other links. In ﬁgure 6 we opted for a diﬀerent strategy in order to give emphasis
to the strong heterogeneity in the distribution of the values of bilateral trade ﬂows. As
we previously mentioned, 25% of total world trade is accounted by the 32 links with
the higher strength. In the ﬁrst panel of ﬁgure 6, panel (a), will just plot a sociogram
17
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
including the major 32 links, and in subsequent panels (b), (c) and (d), we add further
links in a descending order respect to the the strength of links. Furthermore, we choose
to enrich the visualization of ﬁgure 6 adding some speciﬁc economic characteristics of
single countries. To this aim, in each panel of ﬁgure 6, we make the nodes’ dimension
proportional to some endogenous attributes, such as the number of in-coming links (in
panel (a)), or of some exogenous ones, such as GDP (in panel (b)), per capita GDP (in
panel (c)); and openness (in panel (d)).
Figure 6 –
The World Trade Network in Goods, 2007.
The World Trade Network in Goods, 2007. 
(a) 25% of world trade 
!"# 
$%& '!( ')( 
*+" +,-./! 0$/ )10 2#! 
3-(14/ 5+&(%* 
,!"
#6( ",! 
-7 89:(b) 50% of world trade 
!"# 
!$% !$& 
'(" '() '"! 
*!+ *,# *,+ *-# 
.#$ .+/ 
.-! #%01"! 2'" ,/2 
,$+ 
3.+ 3+. 3"( 3%" 3&! 
40+/5" 6#)67%
+2! +(. 
+5" 05( 0"& 
8!& "$% 
%!$%20 %9# 
&,! &$" 
&9+ $/" $%! 
:#+
0;<=> /5" 
!$% 
(c) 75% of world trade 
!"# !$% !$" 
!&' !&( 
)*$ )*+ )$! 
,!- ,.% 
,.* ,.- 
,#* ,$/
,0% 
1%& 1-2 
1#3 
10! %,& 
%"4 %'56/- 6$! ")$ 
"$, 
"(3 .2" 
.$7 .&- 
/1- /-1 /$* 
/$- /$8 /'$ /(! 
95-
2!02#$ 2:( 
*)4 *(& 3!$
3%+34'
-"! -*1 
-#$ -0* #3- 
5!2
5!-5%$5.* 5#* 5$( 
8!( 
$#3 $&' 
'!&'"5 
'72'7-
':% 
(.! 
(23 ((# (&- (&$ 
(:- &2$ &'! 
7%-
7-3 0!6 
5;<=> (d) 90% of world trade 
!"#
!$% 
!%& !'" !() 
!*+ !*% 
!*, !)% 
!-. !-) 
!/+ "01
"+("$! 
"%0 "%* 
"2* "12 
"'* "'3 
"'/ ",-
"&' "*! 
"*" "*( 
")( 4!$ 
4!( 42+ 
42' 42( 
415 
4,* 4&% 
4&' 4*1
4-" 46, 
467 4/+ 
0+- 
0,! 0(8 
0&, 
0/! +4- 
+%6 +.7+.) +)2 
$1( $91
$*! 
$., 
%!" %"* 
%+& %2! 
%1( 
%," %(" 
%(: 
%*4 
%), 
%-6 28% 2(0 
2*5 
2)12-( 
10( 1(0 1*' 
1*( 1*: 
1.' 1.* 1)! 
9!,9&* 97(
8!/8+(8%/ 
82, 
8(! 
8&* 8#) 
'!& '"( 
'"* 
'"6 '4! 
'8! ')- '5! ,!4,!*
,0! ,0% 
,05 ,+3
,2' ,80,'1
,') ,,*
,(% ,&/ ,*) 
,-. ,#1
,6.(4' 
(+* 
(%! (14 ('0 
(&* 
(7' (/' &,( 
7!8
7!(7+*
72' 
7(% 7&' 
7*8 7*) 
7*6 :!) 
*&, *-. 
*#! .!-.0( .+(.%7 .'" 
.'+ .'5 
.&, 
.-* .58.5(
.#+ 
.64
.6*)40 
)%& 
)2! )98 
)8, ))& )-( )-* 
)#( )/! 
-%! 
-8* -*6 -.! 
-/" 
54) 5+(5%" 
5(, 5-) 
#., 6+,
6-% /!$ /!* 
/," 
/#+ 
7;<=> 
Note : Country labels are the iso3 country codes. Trade ﬂows are represented on a gray scale, where light gray indicates
bilateral trade ﬂows of smaller entity and dark gray indicates major entities. The size of the circle associated to each
country is proportional to the number of inﬂows (panel (a)), to GDP (panel (b)), to GDP per capita (panel (c)), and to the
level of openness (panel (d)). GDP is in current US dollars in 2007. Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical
regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek . The sequence of Pajek commands
necessary to reproduce the above ﬁgure is included in the Appendix.
In ﬁgure 6, we zoom out, from panel(a) until panel (d), on the same set of data, to
18
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
emphasize the heterogeneity in the distribution of world trade ﬂows in 2007. Panel (a)
visualizes the top 32 bilateral trade ﬂows, adding up to 25% of world exports. The strength
of the ﬂows is represented on a gray scale: exports from Canada (CAN) to the US (USA)
rank ﬁrst, followed by exports from China (CHN) to the same destination market, and
so on. The world trade is dominated by a core group of 17 key players. Among them,
the most important European countries, the North American countries, Japan (JAP) and
some of the most dynamic East and Southeast Asian countries, Saudi Arabia (SAU), the
only country from Middle East, and Mexico (MEX). To be noted that no other country
from Latin America, besides Mexico, neither from Africa, is among the top world players.
Furthermore, the presence of Taiwan (TWN) and Hong Kong (HKG) and the one of
Benelux (BLX) and the Netherlands (NLD) is due to a worldwide “Rotterdam eﬀect.”15
The US, Germany, and China are the most interconnected countries in the world, as
shown by the dark gray arcs between them. Remarkable is also the relationship among
NAFTA members, the US, Canada, and Mexico.
In this panel the size of vertices is proportional to the number of outﬂows.16The UK
(GBR) and Austria (AUT) receive only one trade inﬂow (from Germany (DEU)) with
no edges indicating outﬂows; the two countries are therefore represented by small circles;
Germany instead is sending trade outﬂows to many countries and is therefore represented
by a big circle.
From the discussion of ﬁgure 3 we should have expected Hong Kong, Taiwan and China
to be close together, and the same for Austria (AUT) and Germany. Taking the latter
case as an example, we can see from panel (a) in ﬁgure 6 that Austria receives just one
trade inﬂow, the one coming from Germany. This exclusivity should act as a unique
attracting force, bringing the two countries close to each other. However, the position of
the two countries, and of all other countries in all the panels in ﬁgure 6 depends not only
on the links visualized in each panel, but on whole trade relationships included in the full
dataset. This is why the position of countries in the same topological space represented
in the subsequent four panels of ﬁgure 6 does not change. And this is why the position
of Taiwan, or the one of the UK (GBR), looks peripheral in panel (a) of ﬁgure 6: the
attracting forces of hidden nodes and arcs (that will become visible in subsequent panels)
more than counterbalance the ones of the visible ones. This is again the visual result of
countries’ interdependence.
If we increase the links up to 50% of world trade ﬂows, the number of countries rises to 43,
15The “Rotterdam eﬀect” is associated to the common practice of transshipment. Rotterdam in the
Netherlands and Antwerp in Belgium are two of the biggest ports in the world, and handle substantial
quantities of north European trade. Some of those imports are consumed in the Netherlands and Belgium,
some others are shipped onwards to other European countries by road or rail; others get transferred to
cargo vessels sailing to other continents.
16In section 3 we will call the number of inﬂows in-degree and the number of outﬂows out-degree . See
Scott (2000) and Newman (2010) for a glossary of the terms used in network analysis.
19
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
generating 158 links. Figure 6 (panel (b)) shows this network emphasizing the economic
dimension of countries, whose proxy variable is here total GDP (the size of vertices is now
proportional to the country GDP in 2007). The GDP captures the so-called “size eﬀect,”
the well-known phenomenon whereby larger countries trade, in absolute terms, more than
smaller ones (Helpman and Krugman, 1985).
The core countries are the largest economic countries as well, while a peripheral position
is held by some small countries, belonging to diﬀerent geographical regions (such as Qatar
(QAT), Venezuela (VEN), Belarus (BLR), Ukraine (UKR), Algeria (DZA), and Taiwan
(TWN)). Countries of middle size now appear as well: among them, some emerging
economies, such as Brazil (BRA), India (IND) and Russia (RUS), located close to the
UK; some North and East European countries, showing strong link with Germany; some
East and South Asian economies, such as Indonesia (IDN), Singapore (SGP), Thailand
(THA), and Malaysia (MYS), placed close to the US (except for the last one); and some
Middle East countries, such as Israel (ISR), Turkey (TUR), the United Arab Emirates
(ARE), and Qatar (QAT), holding very diﬀerent positions in the network. Two African
oil exporting countries belong to this club: Algeria (DZA) and Nigeria (NGA), although
they keep a quite peripheral position.
Adding further links up to 75% of world trade, and characterizing countries by their per
capita GDP (as showed by the size of nodes) to capture the so-called “income eﬀect”
(i.e. richer countries trade more than poorer ones), we get a larger network, which now
comprises 76 countries (ﬁgure 6 (panel (c))). The countries of the core structure are almost
all rich countries as well. This panel emphasizes the emerging of a peripheral shape with
the inclusion of several low income countries (excluding the Arabian Peninsula countries,
such Qatar (QAT) and Oman (OMN)). It’s worth nothing the appearance of many Latin
American countries as well as few African countries, although placed in a semi peripheral
position (with the exception of South Africa (ZAF) placed in the central part of the
network).
Lastly, extending the links up to 90% of total world trade (i.e. including ﬂows of modest
relevance), the network consists of 136 countries. In ﬁgure 6 (panel (d)), the size of the
circle corresponding to a country is proportional to its openness (i.e. export to GDP).
Here the network shows a deﬁnite core-periphery shape. Furthermore, it emphasizes a
well-known notion of the trade literature, that is small countries tend to have more open
economies than large countries. It is particularly apparent for countries belonging to
the East and South East Asia, placed in a central position, such as Singapore (SGP)
and Malaysia (MYS), as well as remote regions such as Marshall Islands (MHL), Vanu-
atu (VUT), the Solomon Islands (SLB), and Brunei Darussalam (BRN) or some African
countries, such as Liberia (LBR) and Congo (COG), all located at the border of the
network.
20
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
2.3. Zooming in and out trade data: Local and Global views
If we are interested in inspecting the structure of trade ties not at global level but in a
speciﬁc part of the network, for example a continent, we could zoom in the network on
countries belonging to the same continent. Figure 7 presents trade links within Europe,
where the size of the vertices is proportional to the value of per capita GDP.
This visualization permits to better identify the position of each European country within
the overall trade network. The structure of this regional network has a polyhedric and
a clear core-periphery form. The main economies of the European Union are the core
group ( Benelux (BLX), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), Italy (ITA), the Netherlands
(NLD), and the United Kingdom (GBR)). Six of them are the founding members of
the European Economic Community, and are members of the Economic and Monetary
Union as well. A peripheral position is displayed by Malta (MLT) and the current EU
candidates (Iceland (ISL) and those belonging to the former Yugoslavia, such as Serbia
and Montenegro (YUG), Macedonia (MKD) and Croatia, (HRV)). Also Moldova (MDA)
seems to be weakly connected to the European network, holding the most peripheral
position among the countries of the Community of Independent States. The “income
eﬀect” is here less evident. Many high income countries are not in the center of the
network, located on the right part (Iceland (ISL), Finland (FIN), and Sweden (SWE)) or
on the left part (Denmark (DNK) and Norway (NOR)) of the network. It is plain also
to detect the central role played by Germany (DEU): it is the country with the strongest
links (observable through the dark gray lines) with the most important European partners.
Albania (ALB), notwithstanding its low income level, is strongly connected to the core
countries. As above underlined, this kind of position denounces a condition of strong
dependence on major players rather than a key role in the network. The same goes also in
the case of Ireland (IRL) and Austria (AUT). It is worth noting the position of Switzerland
(CHE) and Slovakia (SVK) largely connected to the network and with a strong tie with
Germany. Quite peculiar the position of Poland (POL) and Hungary (HUN) curiously
away one from the other, with the ﬁrst one holding a less central position but strongly
connected with Germany.
If our interest is instead to analyze the relations between aggregate geographical regions
to detect, for instance, which continents or sub-continents have strong trade ties, we may
zoom out to obtain a global view of the network (see ﬁgure 8). All exports of European
countries to North American countries, for instance, are now replaced by one new edge
pointing from North America to European countries. The new line indicates the value of
exports that is equal to the sum of all original trade values. The global view shows now the
position of Europe into the world system. Darker gray lines indicate stronger trade links
between geographical regions, while exports within a geographical region are displayed by
loops (lines that connect a vertex to itself). From ﬁgure 8 it is plain to detect the key
role played by Europe in the world trade network, as underlined by both the strong ties
21
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 7 –
Trade links within Europe, 2007.
Note : Country labels are the iso3 country codes. The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to the
value of GDP per capita (GDP per capita in current US dollars in year 2007). Trade ﬂows are described using a gray-scale,
from light (small ﬂows) to dark (large ﬂows). Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using
Pajek . The sequence of Pajek commands necessary to reproduce the above ﬁgure is included in the Appendix.
with North America and East and South East Asia and the dark loop, which reveals the
strongest intra-area trade exchange among all the geographical regions. As relevant the
place of North America and East and South East Asia in the network, while quite peculiar
is the position of Latina America and Caribbean away from North America and closer
to Europe and East and South Asia. It is interesting to notice the central position holds
by Africa in this visualization: Africa accounts for a small percentage of world trade (as
described in ﬁgure 3) and this position is mainly due to its high dependence on (i.e. the
attracting force of) European and East and South Asian players.
3. Local and global centrality measures and relative countries’ position
In section 2.1, we have visualized the “structural” characteristics of the trade network.
Now we want to focus on “ego” measures, i.e. how and how much each single country
(i.e. node) is relatively positioned in the overall network, considering the trade relations
with allcountries inside and outside the geographical region to which it belongs. Country
heterogeneity will be highlighted in terms of the position of each country in the trade
22
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 8 –
Trade among geographical regions, 2007.
Latin America & CaribbeanSouth AsiaAfricaEurope
Middle EastAustralia & OceaniaNorth America
East & South Asia Central Asia
Note : Country labels are the iso3 country codes. The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to the
value of GDP per capita (GDP per capita in current US dollars in year 2007). Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent
geographical regions. Trade ﬂows are described using a gray-scale, from light (small ﬂows) to dark (large ﬂows). Trade
data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek . The sequence of Pajek commands necessary to
reproduce the above ﬁgure is included in the Appendix.
network, and will allow to endogenously rank countries according to their relative cen-
trality . Network analysis provides several indicators to assess the importance of a node
centrality, capturing diﬀerent aspects of its position (Borgatti, 2005). In general, each of
them can provide diﬀerent types of information, the usefulness of which depends on which
kind of relationship the network under analysis is describing (information ﬂows, parental
relationship, bargaining power, infection transmission, etc.). It follows that any particular
measure will be better suited for some applications and less well suited for others. Here,
we give a brief review of these indicators, concentrating our attention on the ones that we
think are more suitable to the description of the World Trade Network.
3.1. Centrality measures
Centrality measures can be classiﬁed into four main groups (Jackson, 2010): a) degree
centrality, CD, that measures how a node is connected to others (with strength centrality
23
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
CSas a weighted version of CD); b) closeness centrality, CC, showing how easily a node can
be reached by other nodes; c) betweenness centrality, describing how important a node is
in terms of connecting other nodes; d) the fourth group of indexes, such as the eigenvector
centrality measure, CE, or the Bonacich centrality, CB, associates node’s centrality to the
node neighbors’ characteristics, directly referring to how important, central, inﬂuential
or tightly clustered a node’s neighbors are. We focus on three of them, limiting the
description of the betweenness centrality to a footnote, since we consider it less suitable
for the trade data used in this analysis.
3.1.1. Degree centrality
Degree centrality is the simplest measure of the position of a node in a network. If the
network is unweighted, it measures the centrality of a node by the number of connections
the node has.
CD=di(L) =♯{i:Li j=1}=N
∑
j̸=iLi j. (1)
Let’s recall that Nis the total number of nodes (countries) in the network, and Li jis the
element (i,j)in the trade adjacency matrix L, where iis the row-indicator corresponding
to exporting countries, and jis the column-indicator corresponding to importing countries.
IfLi j=1the two countries iand jare trade partners (regardless of the direction of trade
ﬂow, i.e. the network is indirected), if Li j=0they are not trading between each others.
The degree centrality measure, being dependent on the number of the existing nodes
in the network, makes it diﬃcult to compare networks of diﬀerent node-size. Even if
this is not what we have in the present version of the World Trade Network (being the
number of countries included in the analysis constant) it is usually better to calculate
the normalized version of CD, using the total number of possible neighbors excluding self,
N−1, as a normalized factor:
CN
D=∑N
j̸=iLi j
(N−1). (2)
It follows that this indicator ranges from 0 to 1; the more is the degree centrality close to
1, the more a country is directly connected to the rest of the network.
In a directed network there will be two measures of degree centrality: in-degree centrality,
measuring the number of arcs pointing to ego, and out-degree centrality, measuring the
number of arcs exiting from ego.17In the case of out-degree, ∑N
j̸=iLi jis the total number
17The sociological literature associates the terms prestige to in-degrees and inﬂuence to out-degrees.
24
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
of countries toward which country iis exporting; in the case of in-degree, ∑N
j̸=iLjiis the
total number of countries from which country iis importing,
CN
Dout=∑N
j̸=iLi j
(N−1)CN
Din=∑N
j̸=iLji
(N−1). (3)
The degree centralities CN
DoutandCN
Din, deﬁned in equation 3, are summarized in columns
(1) and (2) in table 1.18Aruba, the ﬁrst country in alphabetical order in our dataset, has
an in-degree centrality of 0.37 and an out-degree centrality of 0.36. Generally, the two
measure are not much diﬀerent one from the other, but exceptions are possible. Armenia
has an in-degree centrality of 0.73 and an out-degree centrality of 0.58. The country is
receiving links from 73% of the countries in the network, while is sending links to 58% of
them. The ratio of the two measures indicates the relative connectivity of a country in
terms of inﬂows (with a ratio greater than 1) or outﬂows (with a ratio smaller than 1).
Armenia, with a degree-ratio of 1.26 is better structurally connected in terms of in-degree
than in out-degree.
If we normalize the number of links in equation 1 by the total number on links Min the
network, we obtain the following measures:
CP
Dout=∑N
j̸=iLi j
MCP
Din=∑N
j̸=iLji
M. (4)
In this case, the out-degree centrality measure CP
Doutindicates the number of country’s
out-degree in percentage terms, and similarly for CP
Din. The degree centralities deﬁned in
equation 4 are summarized in columns (3) and (4) in table 1. Aruba’s degree centralities
in percentage terms are CP
Din=0.30 and CP
Dout=0.29, meaning that among the M=22002
links in the 2007 trade network, Aruba is responsible of the 0.30% of unweighted inﬂows
and 0.29% of unweighted outﬂows.
Moving to the weighted version of the network, we now examine strength centrality , con-
sidering trade volumes instead of trade partnerships. Given the very strong heterogeneity
18We calculated the centrality measures in equations 3 and 5 for the year 2007 using the Stata Graph
Library ( SGL). The full panel 1995-2010 of (these and subsequent) centrality measures for 178 countries
can be downloaded from the CEPII databases page. The structure of the downloadable data is the same
of tables 1 and 2. In table 1 (for the unweighted trade network) and table 2 (for the weighted trade
network) we include, for expositional purposes, just a subset of the countries in the sample, the ﬁrst and
last ten countries in alphabetical order. We discuss and compare the diﬀerent outcomes obtained using
diﬀerent centrality measures in the unweighted and weighted trade network in section 3.2.
25
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Table 1 – Centrality - unweighted measures
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
id i iso3 country Out-degree In-degree Out-degree percent In-degree percent Out-closeness In-closeness Out-eigenvector In-eigenvector
1 533 ABW Aruba .35593 .37288 .28634 .29997 .60825 .61458 .0396 .04252
2 4 AFG Afghanistan .49718 .48588 .39996 .39087 .66541 .66045 .05651 .05558
3 24 AGO Angola .42373 .55367 .34088 .44541 .63441 .69141 .04887 .06264
4 8 ALB Albania .62712 .71186 .5045 .57268 .7284 .77632 .06842 .07549
5 530 ANT Netherlands Antilles .53107 .46328 .42723 .37269 .68077 .65074 .05777 .05198
6 784 ARE United Arab Emirates .9322 .89831 .74993 .72266 .93651 .90769 .09198 .09089
7 32 ARG Argentina .93785 .76271 .75448 .61358 .94149 .80822 .09273 .07971
8 51 ARM Armenia .57627 .73446 .46359 .59086 .70238 .79018 .06265 .07706
9 28 ATG Antigua and Barbuda .51977 .64972 .41814 .52268 .67557 .74059 .05571 .06862
10 36 AUS Australia .9887 .9661 .79538 .7772 .98883 .96721 .09499 .09479
··· ··· ··· ···
169 92 VGB Virgin Islands .49153 .44633 .39542 .35906 .66292 .64364 .05309 .04982
170 704 VNM Viet nam .9209 .77966 .74084 .62722 .9267 .81944 .09161 .08121
171 548 VUT Vanuatu .31638 .36158 .25452 .29088 .59396 .61034 .03615 .04019
172 882 WSM Samoa .24859 .32203 .19998 .25907 .57097 .59596 .02909 .03725
173 887 YEM Yemen .59887 .66102 .48177 .53177 .71371 .74684 .06487 .07087
174 891 YUG Serbia and Montenegro .83616 .88701 .67267 .71357 .85922 .89848 .08553 .08965
175 711 ZAF South Africa .9887 .98305 .79538 .79084 .98883 .98333 .09528 .096
176 180 ZAR Congo Dem. Rep. .40678 .41243 .32724 .33179 .62766 .62989 .04611 .04724
177 894 ZMB Zambia .55932 .66667 .44996 .53631 .69412 .75 .06171 .07135
178 716 ZWE Zimbabwe .77966 .59887 .62722 .48177 .81944 .71371 .07986 .06467
Table 2 – Centrality - weighted measures
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
id i iso3 country Out-strength In-strength Out-strength In-strength W-Out-closeness W-In-closeness W-Out-eigenvector W-In-eigenvector
percent percent
1 533 ABW Aruba 24328.21 14732.21 .03207 .01942 .72634 .35986 .00257 .00142
2 4 AFG Afghanistan 1880.917 20843.3 .00248 .02747 .11901 .31131 .00003 .00108
3 24 AGO Angola 187955 68658.4 .24775 .0905 .82343 .37339 .02293 .00396
4 8 ALB Albania 6845.41 24469.3 .00902 .03225 .48718 .34375 .00032 .00093
5 530 ANT Netherlands Antilles 19876.57 26701.99 .0262 .0352 .46844 .37334 .00089 .00303
6 784 ARE United Arab Emirates 788635 694503.6 1.03952 .91544 .84608 .41277 .04276 .04072
7 32 ARG Argentina 323668.9 244444.3 .42664 .32221 .80289 .40881 .01575 .01512
8 51 ARM Armenia 7777.557 18172.09 .01025 .02395 .23745 .28337 .00031 .0007
9 28 ATG Antigua and Barbuda 1490.491 9677.804 .00196 .01276 .12058 .25492 .00006 .00076
10 36 AUS Australia 823285.5 869600 1.08519 1.14624 .84254 .41627 .06398 .06164
··· ··· ··· ···
169 92 VGB Virgin Islands 2261.846 21634.1 .00298 .02852 .17193 .36645 .0001 .00076
170 704 VNM Vietnam 307967.3 361909.4 .40594 .47704 .82077 .41135 .02439 .0185
171 548 VUT Vanuatu 1990.4 1511.497 .00262 .00199 .20592 .08091 .00012 .00006
172 882 WSM Samoa 989.1105 1631.536 .0013 .00215 .1976 .09984 .00003 .00007
173 887 YEM Yemen 40926.56 60153.24 .05395 .07929 .63469 .34658 .0028 .00314
174 891 YUG Serbia and Montenegro 50779.54 117439.3 .06693 .1548 .6137 .37973 .00158 .00451
175 711 ZAF South Africa 502145.9 460072.9 .66189 .60643 .81734 .40969 .03207 .02632
176 180 ZAR Congo Dem. Rep. 11157.5 15483.54 .01471 .02041 .41192 .29855 .00084 .00055
177 894 ZMB Zambia 34256.3 22570.01 .04515 .02975 .67041 .36212 .00138 .00061
178 716 ZWE Zimbabwe 21609.34 18506.23 .02848 .02439 .6039 .35782 .00074 .00051
among trade ﬂows, as reported in section 2.1, strength centrality measures will diﬀer from
degree centralities. Unweighted and weighted networks conceive diﬀerent information
(Newman, 2010).
In equation 5, the centrality measure are computed aggregating over of the weights of the
arcs (export or imports ﬂows) connected to the node and normalizing by (N−1). The
index we obtain is a measure of the out-strength and in-strength .
26
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
CN
Sout=∑N
j̸=iWi j
(N−1)CN
Sin=∑N
j̸=iWji
(N−1). (5)
The strength centralities deﬁned in equation 5 are summarized in columns (1) and (2) in
table 2. Aruba has an ‘average’ ﬂow of imports of 14732 thousands of US dollars, and an
‘average’ ﬂow of exports of 24328 thousands of US dollars.19The prevalence of CN
Soutover
CN
Sinindicates an overall trade surplus.
If we normalize the in-strength and out-strength by total world trade ( ∑i∑jWi j=∑i∑jWji)
we obtain:
CP
Sout=∑N
j̸=iWi j
∑i∑jWi jCP
Sin=∑N
j̸=iWji
∑i∑jWji, (6)
which measure the strength centralities in percentage terms. Obviously, the measures
deﬁned in equation 6, and summarized in column (3) and (4) in table 2, are plain vanilla
trade shares. Aruba has a market share of 0.0194% over total exports and a share of
0.0321% over total imports. Switching to big players, in 2007 China had an export share
of 10.2% and an import share of 5.5%, while the US had an export share of 8.3% and an
import share of 14.0%.
As you can see, some network centrality measures are closely related or are perfectly
matching more traditional trade statistics, such trade shares. Therefore, what’s the point
of describing and discussing them? We will come back to this point later, but as a prelim
of a deeper discussion it is suﬃcient to say that in the next sections we will compare this
network measures with other more complex measures as a way to relate more traditional
trade statistics with network centrality measures that take the whole structure of the
network into account. This as a way to highlight the diﬀerence between networks centrality
measure and alternative trade indicators.
To conclude this presentation of degree and strength centrality measures it is notewor-
thy that weighted measures should not be considered as an improvement to unweighted
measures. Both measures point to diﬀerent aspects. Degree centrality puts the emphasis
on the number of trade links disregarding the speciﬁc weights of the link. As can be
seen in tables 1 and 2, Australia and South Africa share the same out-degree centrality
(CN
Dout=0.99) while the out-strength centrality points out that Australia has an export
19The measure is an ‘average’ with respect to the possible maximum number of trade partners, not the
realize number of trade partners. Dividing CN
SbyCN
Dgenerates a proper algebraic mean of aggregated
ﬂows of imports and exports, respectively.
27
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
share CN
Soutalmost double that of South Africa. On the other hand, weighted measures,
putting emphasis on trade volumes, disregard the numerosity of trade partnerships of a
country, and countries with few links of high strength or many links of lesser strength will
be accounted for in an equal way. Unweighted and weighted measures should be looked
in parallel, exploiting the joint information coming from the two of them.
Those unweighted and weighted measures have an obvious counterpart in the notion of
trade partners and trade volumes (Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein, 2008), and can also be
manipulated to match naturally with the notion of intensive an extensive margin of trade
(Felbermayr and Koheler, 2005). Since in our case the number of nodes is ﬁxed, a variation
in the weights of already existing trade links in the weighted trade network is equivalent
to the notion of intensive margin, while the activation of previously non-existing bilateral
trade ﬂows (i.e. new weighted links) is equivalent to the notion of extensive margin.
The degree and the strength centrality are essentially local centrality measures . They take
into consideration only the direct links of a node, its nearest neighborhood , respectless
to the position of the node in the network’s structure. In the network represented in
ﬁgure 3 all countries have by construction the same out-degree, i.e. CN
Dout=2, however,
they attain very diﬀerent positions in the network. Analogously, Paraguay (PGY) and
Egypt (EGY) have both the same out-degree, as all the other countries have, and the
same in-deegre CN
Din=0; however, Paraguay is at the south-periphery of ﬁgure 3, while
Egypt is at center of the ﬁgure. Their positions depend in fact on the position of other
countries : Paraguay is linked with peripheral countries, while Egypt is linked with very
central countries. To uncover the eﬀect of others we should move from local centrality
measures to global centrality measures .
3.1.2. Closeness centrality
One of the most commonly used global centrality measures is the closeness centrality . It
is a measure of how close (in terms of topological distance) a node is with respect to all
other nodes. In general terms, the concept of distance in network analysis is related to
the number of steps needed for some node ‘to reach’ another node in the network. The
shortest path between country iand country jis called the geodesic distance between i
and j.
Taking the inverse of the average geodesic distance as a measure of proximity, closeness
centrality provides high centrality scores to nodes that are located closer to the set of
reachable nodes:
CN
C=(N−1)
∑N
j̸=iDi j, (7)
28
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
whereDi jis the number of steps in the shortest path between iand j. If country iis
directly linked to all the other countries, the variable Di jwould be 1 for every country-pair
connection. In this case the denominator of equation 7 would be equal to (N−1)and
CN
C=1. The lesser one country is directly linked to others in terms of bilateral trade ﬂows,
the lower will be its closeness centrality.
Since the numerator of equation 7 is also the minimum possible value reachable by the
denominator, the closeness centrality can also be interpreted as the inverse of the propor-
tion between the shortest of the shortest paths and the sum of the actual shortest paths.
In other therms, it is a distance measure between the actual topological distance and the
minimum possible one.
As for the case of the degree centrality, we must consider the directionality of trade ﬂows.
CN
Cout=(N−1)
∑N
j̸=iDi jCN
Cin=(N−1)
∑N
j̸=iDji. (8)
In this case, the out-closeness centrality CN
Coutindicates the sum of the geodesic distances of
country i, normalized by the maximum number of possible export partners. CN
Cinindicates
a similar measure for import partners. The closeness centralities deﬁned in equation 8 are
summarized in columns (5) and (6) in table 1 and discussed in section 3.2. Continuing
the dissection of the Aruba case, the out-closeness centrality is equal to CN
Cout=0.61, which
results from the inverse of the sum of Aruba’s geodesic distances ( ∑N
j̸=iDi j=290), normal-
ized by (N−1)=177. Counting 66 export partners for Aruba, its average geodesic distance
is 4.39, i.e. Aruba is on average 4.39 topological steps away from all other countries in the
net. If we now consider Australia or South Africa – two cases of well connected countries
exporting to 175 foreign countries and having an out-degree centrality very close to 1,
i.e.CN
Dout=0.99 – their out-closeness centrality CN
Coutis quite similar to their out-degree
centrality. In those cases, when the sum of the geodesic paths approximates the degree
of a node, global centrality measures are equivalent to local centrality measures . On the
contrary, the lesser a country is directly connected to other countries, the more the two
measures will separate from each others. We will further discuss this issue in section 3.2.20
20The same happens for other global measures, such as the betweenness centrality . This measure of
centrality depicts how well situated a node is in terms of the path that it lies on. It assign highest score to
nodes that lie on a larger proportion of shortest paths linking pairs of other nodes. Betweenness centrality
is a useful measure in the cases when a node is important as an intermediary i.e. in a communication
network. A node is crucial in the transmission of information if ﬂows of information are disrupted or must
make longer path if that node stops passing information or if it disappear from the network. However,
in the case of aggregate or sectoral trade ﬂows, this measure seems not well suited for an application
to bilateral trade relationship, unless if it would be possible to distinguish among trade ﬂows in ﬁnal
products and intermediate products.
29
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
In the case of closeness centrality, moving from the unweighted to the weighted version of
the centrality is less straight forward than with degree centrality. A weighted path is in
fact a mixture of two components: the length of the path (i.e. the minimum number of
steps between iand j) and the strength of the single steps of the path (i.e. bilateral trade
ﬂows). If one takes the components in a multiplicative way, the second component would
inﬂate the weighted length of a path between two countries, reducing the centrality of
the relevant country. This is what the SGLroutine and the igraph library do by default.
We will therefore follow a procedure proposed by Newman (2010) and Opsahl (2009) and
implemented in the tnet R library.
We started from the algorithm elaborated by Dijkstra (1959) and apply it to a trans-
formation of the original trade weighted matrix. In this case the elements in the line
value function are not anymore the bilateral trade volumes Wi j, but the share between
Wi jand the average bilateral trade volume in world trade: ωi j=NWi j
∑i∑jWi j. In this case,
the Dijkstra (1959) algorithm calculates the weighted geodesic distance over ωi j:
li j=min(1
ωiz1+1
ωiz2+···+1
ωzn−3j+1
ωzn−2j)
, (9)
where the zs are the intermediate steps necessary to reach jfrom i. The resulting nor-
malized weighted closeness centrality for directed networks is
CNW
Cout=(N−1)
∑N
j̸=ili jCNW
Cin=(N−1)
∑N
j̸=ilji. (10)
The weighted closeness centralities deﬁned in equation 10 are summarized in column (5)
and (6) in table 2 and discussed in section 3.2. Aruba has a CNW
Cout=0.726 and a CNW
Cin=0.359;
Australia has a CNW
Cout=0.842 and instead a CNW
Cin=0.416. Comparing the unweighted and the
weighted closeness centralities, the distance between Australia and Aruba has decreased
in the weighted version of the measure.
What does CNW
Cout=0.842 mean? The index can be interpreted as the inverse of the average
weighted geodesic distance from ito its (N−1)potential trade partners.21In the Aus-
tralian case, this is 1.187=1
0.842, having ωi jas the metric, i.e. Australia is 1.187 steps
away from the rest of world countries, where steps are measured in terms of the average
bilateral trade ﬂow in world trade. Aruba is 1.377 steps away; Antigua and Barbuda are
8.333 steps away on average.
21When country iis not directly connected to country j, the li jis imputed using the average of the
shortest weighted path from itoj(Dijkstra, 1959).
30
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
In both the Australian and the Aruban cases CNW
Cout>CNW
Cin. In the weighted version of
the index, the prevalence of the out-closeness over the in-closeness is veriﬁed in the large
majority of the cases. In the unweighted version of it, the positive sign in the diﬀerence
between out-closeness and in-closeness is less prevalent than in the weighted version.
Moreover, the sign is not invariant moving from the unweighted to the weighted version
of the closeness centrality measure, and only the countries where CN
Cout≫CN
Cintend to have
aCNW
Cout>CNW
Cin. The opposite is however not true.
As for the the strength-centrality measure, the weighted closeness centrality does not
put emphasis on the number of links in the paths considered. The two measures, the
unweighted and the weighted closeness centrality should be considered in a complementary
way.
3.1.3. Eigenvector centrality
In addition to closeness (and betweenness) centrality, we can describe another and diﬀerent
perspective on global centrality. If closeness was stressing the relevance of links, here we
stress the relevance of nodes. As we showed in ﬁgure 3, it is not irrelevant if a node
is connected to central players or to peripheral ones. The basic idea is that a node’s
eigenvector centrality is determined by the eigenvector centrality of its neighbors. It is
not the country’s centrality itself that matters, what really matters is the centrality of the
countries linked to him. The circularity of the argument is evident, but can be tackled
using some matrix algebra.
Starting from a binary trade-matrix, it is possible to use the Bonacich (1972) eigenvector
centrality to deﬁne the centrality of country ias the sum of the eigenvector centralities of
its neighbors. That is:
CE(i) =Li1CE(1)+Li2CE(2)+···+Li(n−1)CE(n−1)+LinCE(n). (11)
The system of equations, including the eigenvector centrality of all ncountries, can be
rewritten in matrix form as:
(I−L)− →CE=0, (12)
where Iis an×nidentity matrix, Lis the trade adjacency matrix introduced in section
2.1, and− →CEis the n×1vector of countries’ eigenvector centralities. Equation 12 is the
31
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
trade-matrix characteristic equation for an eigenvalue λ=1.22From the Perron-Frobenius
theorem we know that a square matrix with positive (and some classes of nonnegative)
real entries has a unique largest real eigenvalue and that the corresponding eigenvector
has strictly positive components. The normalization we choose, as well as for a row-
normalized or a column-normalized trade-matrix,23allows to exploit this property and to
consider the entries of the relevant eigenvector as a measure of country centrality.
The eigenvector centralities deﬁned in equation 12 are summarized in columns (7) and
(8) in table 1 and discussed in section 3.2. Aruba has an out-eigenvector centrality equal
toCN
Eout=0.039, and an in-eigenvector centrality equal to CN
Ein=0.042. Australia has an
out-eigenvector centrality equal to CN
Eout=0.094, and an in-eigenvector centrality equal to
CN
Ein=0.094. In general, countries with a high value of eigenvector centrality are the ones
which are connected to many other countries which are, in turn, connected to many
others. The largest values correspond to countries in large and cohesive (high-density)
sub-networks. In spite of being a measure of global centrality the eigenvector centrality
is highly correlated with the degree centrality.24A fortiori, given the high density of the
World Trade Network.
Some problems may arise in case of a poorly connected graph (Newman, 2010). In case of
a sharp segmentation of the network (e.g. extreme trade regionalization with disconnected
regional components)25allcountries would have an eigenvector centrality of zero, as a
consequence of the circularity in the system of equations 11 . To avoid this shortcoming,
a variation of equation 12 has been proposed by Bonacich (1987). Here the Bonacich
centrality CBis deﬁned as:
CB= (I−βL)−1αLu, (13)
22Bonacich (1987) proposes also a variant of equation 12 were λ̸=1. In this case, ( λI−L)− →CE=0, and
the centrality of country iwould be proportional to the centralities of its trade partners. Negative values
ofλindicate conﬂictual relations (e.g. zero sum games on market shares), positive values indicate mutual
gains.
23This is exactly the procedure proposed by Katz (1953). In the case of the prestige centrality index
that takes its name, he proposed to adopt a column normalized matrix where the entries were the ratio
Li j
dj(L). The relevant matrix becomes a column stochastic matrix. Extending Katz’s procedure to a row
normalized matrix an analogous centrality index. Often the names of Bonacich and Katz are associated
in the denomination of this kind of eigenvector centrality measures. See also Bonacich and Lloyd (2001)
and Newman (2010) on this issue. In SGLandigraph the standard option operates on the transpose of
Land the in-eigenvector centrality is produced by default (Miura, 2012) and (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006).
24This is not a case: the ﬁrst eigenvector of Lis closely related to the rank-one decomposition of the
adjacency matrix.
25In this case the trade matrix would be characterized by block-diagonality and the networks would show
some disconnected components.
32
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
where uis a 1×nvector of ones, and αandβare scalars, and βis suﬃciently small
(β<1/λ) so that equation 13 is well deﬁned. In this formula, the additional inclusion
ofβ(as a decay parameter) makes the CBofiproportional to the centrality of other
countries, while α(as a vector of exogenous factors that inﬂuence centrality and can
be constant or vary across countries) allows for a positive centrality even in the case of
disconnected components of the graph.
In spite the fact that the Bonacich centrality allows for a more ﬂexible formulation,26and
the wide use of CBin applications of network analysis in economics (Zenou, 2012) we do
not calculate it, since it is a linear transformation of CE.
We produce instead a weighted version of the out and in-eigenvector centrality measures.
CNW
EoutandCNW
Einare summarized in column (7) and (8) in table 2 and discussed in section
3.2.
3.2. Global trade though centrality indexes lenses
As we have seen in the previous paragraph, each index focuses on a particular aspect of
the concept of centrality. In the empirical analysis, we need to make a choice between the
diﬀerent measures of centrality based on the characteristics of the phenomenon and the
network we are looking at.
Showing a ranking of index values (calculated on the whole set of 178 countries), it is
possible to identify which countries are more integrated in World Trade Network and the
diﬀerences emerging from the use of diﬀerent indicators. In Table 3 and 4 we report
the ranking calculated from the same centrality indices included in table 1 and 2. For
simplicity, we only report the ranking for a limited number of countries; in particular, we
choose to focus on OECD, BRICS and “next eleven” (N-11) countries, identiﬁed as the
most prominent countries in international trade. We report and comment the ranking
related to 2007 indices value, the same reference year of the one considered in the ﬁgures
included in section 2 and 3. Furthermore, our comment focuses on the top positions in the
ranking. When interesting, we look at the weighted and unweighted version of indices to
highlight diﬀerences in the position of a country in a network emerging when we explicitly
consider the size of trade ﬂows.
As highlighted in the previous paragraph, the Out-degree and In-degree measures (columns
(1) and (2) in table 3) and the Out-degree percent and In-degree percent (columns (3) and
(4) in table 3) respectively diﬀer only in terms of the normalization factor (see equation 3
and 4), showing a correlation of 1 and an identical country ranking. Also the Out-closeness
26See the original paper by Bonacich (1987) for an interpretation of αandβand Newman (2010) and
Jackson (2010) for an overview. Kali and Reyes (2007) exploit the ﬂexibility of the measure to include
as exogenous αfactors the level of openness of the country or its GDP per capita. There is no generally
valid procedure to follow and the selection of αshould be driven by the scope of the analysis.
33
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
and the In-closeness unweighted indices (columns (5) and (6) in table 3) show an identical
ranking than the previous two indices. This is not a general result, it is due in the speciﬁc
case of the aggregated World Trade Network in 2007 to the presence of a high number
of strongly connected countries. In other words, if many countries are directly connected
with all other N−1countries in the network, the number of steps in the shortest path
from a country and its possible partners is close to one (see equation 7): the Pearson
correlation between CN
DoutandCN
Coutis 0.98, while the rank correlation is perfect. Only in
the case of the eigenvector centrality the ranking in table 1 changes. Not dramatically
in the top players ranking; much more in the case of countries in intermediate ranking
positions.
Regarding weighted indicators, Out-strength and In-strength measures (columns (1) and
(2) in table 4) and Out-strength and In-strength percent measures (columns (3) and (4)
in table 4) also show a Pearson and a Spearman correlation of 1, respectively, diﬀering
only in terms of the normalizing factor (see equation 5 and 6). Closeness and Eigenvector
centrality measures show instead a diﬀerent ranking. The linear correlation between CP
Sout
andCNW
Coutis 0.39, while the linear correlation between CP
SoutandCNW
Eoutis 0.86.
Generally, when we look at unweighted centrality measures, the integration process in
world trade is enhanced and the increasing importance of regional trade and of some
emergent countries become evident. Instead, when we look at weighted centrality mea-
sures, a more traditional centre-periphery picture is conﬁrmed.
Looking at tables 3 and 4 measure by measure, the in-degree index CN
Dinshows that the
big European countries are the most integrated in the World Trade Network. Germany,
France, UK, Spain, Italy and the small open economy of Netherlands occupy the ﬁrst
place in the ranking, while China, Mexico and US the second one. However, when we
look at the export side, CN
Doutshows that not only China and the US rank ﬁrst, but also
several Asian countries, like India and Indonesia, display the highest index value: a clear
evidence of the increased importance of South East Asia in international trade. It is
interesting to notice that also smaller countries (Belgium, Switzerland and Denmark in
the case of Europe) or emerging ones (Brazil and Turkey) rank second, showing an high
number of direct link with the rest of the world. When we look at weighted version
of these indexes, not surprisingly CN
Sinshows that the US is the more central country in
the World Trade Network. European countries, like Germany, France, UK, Spain, Italy
and the Netherlands are placed in the top 10 positions, conﬁrming their centrality in
trade relationships, especially in terms of imports, due to their high degree of economic
development. China ranks third.
As for weighted closeness, CN
Cinhighlights the importance of US centrality in the world
trade. In the ﬁrst four positions we can ﬁnd Canada (2) and Mexico(4), two countries
strictly tied to US through the NAFTA Agreement. China rank sixth, but it jumps to the
ﬁrst position when we look at the Out-closeness index CN
Cout. Since eigenvector centrality
34
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
measures look at the country’s centrality in terms of the centrality of its neighbors, CN
Einshows that Indonesia and India, together with China, rank ﬁrst, reﬂecting the importance
of the countries from which they import. However their ranking is much lower in the case
ofCN
Eout(27, 14 and 6 respectively), reﬂecting their strong trade linkages with other Asian
countries, whose neighbors are less central on a global scale.
As previously mentioned, when we look at the weighted eigenvector index, a more tradi-
tional picture emerges. US rank ﬁrst in terms of CNW
Eout, followed by Canada and Germany.
Among developing countries, only China (4) is included in the leading group: again, a
country whose trade relationship with the US (and other developed countries) is particu-
larly strong. This last evidence is more clear when we look at In-eigenvector index CNW
Ein,
where China ranks ﬁrst. Like the unweighted version of this index, and diﬀerently from
other centrality measures, the importance of China’s neighbors in terms of imports is
higher that in terms of export ﬂows.
Table 3 – Centrality - unweighted measures
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
id i iso3 country Out-degree In-degree Out-degree percent In-degree percent Out-closeness In-closeness Out-eigenvector In-eigenvector
10 36 AUS Australia 3 6 3 6 3 6 9 19
11 40 AUT Austria 1 6 1 6 1 6 1 21
16 50 BGD Bangladesh 11 15 11 15 11 15 25 40
21 58 BLX Belgium-Luxembourg 2 5 2 5 2 5 2 16
25 76 BRA Brazil 2 7 2 7 2 7 6 24
30 124 CAN Canada 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 11
32 152 CHL Chile 21 38 21 38 21 38 45 80
33 156 CHN China 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 6
42 203 CZE Czech republic 7 3 7 3 7 3 15 9
45 208 DNK Denmark 2 8 2 8 2 8 2 22
49 818 EGY Egypt 15 24 15 24 15 24 32 54
51 233 EST Estonia 23 46 23 46 23 46 47 100
53 246 FIN Finland 3 14 3 14 3 14 5 34
55 251 FRA France 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3
43 276 DEU Germany 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 4
65 300 GRC Greece 9 13 9 13 9 13 20 31
72 348 HUN Hungary 6 16 6 16 6 16 12 41
78 352 ISL Iceland 32 41 32 41 32 41 58 85
74 699 IND India 1 4 1 4 1 4 1 14
73 360 IDN Indonesia 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 27
76 364 IRN Iran 37 59 37 59 37 59 69 118
75 372 IRL Ireland 6 5 6 5 6 5 13 17
79 376 ISR Israel 10 17 10 17 10 17 29 47
80 381 ITA Italy 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
83 392 JPN Japan 2 3 2 3 2 3 3 13
104 484 MEX Mexico 7 2 7 2 7 2 18 8
120 528 NLD Netherlands 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2
123 554 NZL New Zealand 6 13 6 13 6 13 17 33
118 566 NGA Nigeria 30 14 30 14 30 14 57 36
121 579 NOR Norway 5 17 5 17 5 17 11 42
125 586 PAK Pakistan 4 12 4 12 4 12 10 32
128 608 PHL Philippines 9 25 9 25 9 25 23 58
130 616 POL Poland 6 4 6 4 6 4 14 15
132 620 PRT Portugal 8 17 8 17 8 17 19 43
136 643 RUS Russian Federation 10 16 10 16 10 16 22 38
147 703 SVK Slovak Republic 13 17 13 17 13 17 27 45
148 705 SVN Slovenia 19 31 19 31 19 31 37 66
175 711 ZAF South Africa 3 3 3 3 3 3 8 10
89 410 KOR South Korea 2 5 2 5 2 5 7 18
50 724 ESP Spain 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 5
149 752 SWE Sweden 1 7 1 7 1 7 1 23
31 757 CHE Switzerland 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 12
159 792 TUR Turkey 2 10 2 10 2 10 2 26
165 842 USA United States 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 7
58 826 GBR United kingdom 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 4
170 704 VNM Vietnam 14 31 14 31 14 31 30 63
To sum up, when we look at the unweighted centrality measures, the increased importance
of some Asian countries is highlighted. A more traditional picture, however, emerges when
35
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Table 4 – Centrality - weighted measures
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
id i iso3 country Out-strength In-strength Out-strength percent In-strength percent W-Out-closeness W-In-closeness W-Out-eigenvector W-In-eigenvector
10 36 AUS Australia 25 22 25 22 26 25 21 19
11 40 AUT Austria 24 23 24 23 15 14 26 20
16 50 BGD Bangladesh 71 69 71 69 71 72 62 75
21 58 BLX Belgium-Luxembourg 11 9 11 9 13 12 13 10
25 76 BRA Brazil 22 29 22 29 28 28 24 25
30 124 CAN Canada 9 12 9 12 5 2 5 2
32 152 CHL Chile 38 47 38 47 47 51 36 43
33 156 CHN China 1 3 1 3 1 6 1 4
42 203 CZE Czech Republic 31 28 31 28 19 21 32 30
45 208 DNK Denmark 33 30 33 30 39 29 38 32
49 818 EGY Egypt 63 49 63 49 80 57 66 50
51 233 EST Estonia 76 74 76 74 97 90 92 88
53 246 FIN Finland 34 37 34 37 50 35 42 36
55 251 FRA France 5 5 5 5 9 8 9 7
43 276 DEU Germany 2 2 2 2 2 3 4 3
65 300 GRC Greece 61 39 61 39 78 42 69 40
72 348 HUN Hungary 36 31 36 31 30 26 40 33
78 352 ISL Iceland 98 95 98 95 108 124 95 90
74 699 IND India 20 17 20 17 27 27 25 21
73 360 IDN Indonesia 27 34 27 34 29 43 22 37
76 364 IRN Iran 39 46 39 46 41 53 39 52
75 372 IRL Ireland 26 33 26 33 25 23 23 29
79 376 ISR Israel 48 45 48 45 35 47 44 38
80 381 ITA Italy 6 7 6 7 12 9 11 11
83 392 JPN Japan 4 6 4 6 4 7 3 8
104 484 MEX Mexico 14 14 14 14 7 4 6 6
120 528 NLD Netherlands 8 8 8 8 11 11 12 9
123 554 NZL New Zealand 59 56 59 56 65 58 58 54
118 566 NGA Nigeria 41 51 41 51 22 64 37 51
121 579 NOR Norway 30 35 30 35 33 41 28 35
125 586 PAK Pakistan 65 53 65 53 70 63 63 59
128 608 PHL Philippines 40 43 40 43 49 52 35 41
130 616 POL Poland 29 20 29 20 21 17 31 22
132 620 PRT Portugal 49 38 49 38 52 31 54 39
136 643 RUS Russian Federation 12 18 12 18 24 18 16 18
147 703 SVK Slovak Republic 44 44 44 44 44 38 49 47
148 705 SVN Slovenia 60 58 60 58 63 55 64 62
175 711 ZAF South Africa 37 36 37 36 48 44 34 34
89 410 KOR South Korea 10 13 10 13 8 16 7 13
50 724 ESP Spain 16 10 16 10 23 13 18 14
149 752 SWE Sweden 21 24 21 24 38 22 27 26
31 757 CHE Switzerland 19 19 19 19 16 15 17 17
159 792 TUR Turkey 32 21 32 21 40 30 43 23
165 842 USA United States 3 1 3 1 3 1 2 1
58 826 GBR United Kingdom 7 4 7 4 10 5 10 5
170 704 VNM Vietnam 46 42 46 42 45 37 45 42
we take into account the size of bilateral trade ﬂows. Looking at weighted indices, the
result is a framework that emphasizes the importance of US and European countries as
key players in international trade (degree and strength indices,) the centrality of US as a
hub in the trade network (closeness, eigenvector,) the importance of China as a partner
of the major advanced countries (eigenvector).
If we extend the analysis, including each of the 178 countries in the dataset, signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the local and global ranking position emerges for countries less integrated in
the World Trade Network. Figure 9 plots together the rankings obtained from local (out-
degree and out-strength) and global (out-eigenvector) indices. The greater the distance
from the diagonal, the greater the diﬀerence in the relative positioning of the country
expressed by the two indices. In particular, countries above (below) the diagonal are less
(more) central when their position is measured by a local with respect to a global measure
of centrality.
Panel (a) in ﬁgure 9 shows that, when unweighted centrality measure are calculated,
36
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
rankings obtained from global and local indices are quite similar. As we mentioned before,
this is due to the presence of a high number of strongly connected countries in the World
Trade Network.27However, in panel (b) of ﬁgure 9 (weighted indicators), a signiﬁcant
dispersion is associated with the central part of the ranking positions, while it is lower at
the two extremes. It follows, that the major diﬀerence between local centrality measures
and global centrality measures concerns those countries showing an intermediate position
in the country ranking. Countries above the diagonal increase their ranking position when
centrality includes the “eﬀect of others,” i.e. the structural component inﬂuencing their
position in the network.
Like in the ﬁgures of previous paragraphs, colors depict geographical regions. European
countries (red) are mainly located below the diagonal (more in details, those European
countries are Eastern European peripheral countries such as the Baltic States, Cyprus,
Ukraine, Bosnia, and Turkey,) while above the diagonal it is possible to ﬁnd a group
of Latin American and African countries (green and blue). The ”below-the-diagonal”
European countries are therefore less central from a structural point of view, even if
they are closely related to EU countries. More generally, if a country is closely related
to a very integrated area (like the EU) but this relationship represents almost all of its
overall bilateral trade, the transition from local to global measures of centrality shows a
signiﬁcant reduction of its importance in the World Trade Network ranking. Similarly,
African and especially Latin American countries appear to be more structurally connected
at the global level.
Among the countries above the diagonal, it is also possible to identify a number of coun-
tries whose peripheral location within the network depends on geographical (islands such
as Aruba, Madagascar, Jamaica, Cuba, Haiti, New Caledonia) or political (North Korea)
factors. Their ties with central partners increase their own global centrality, which is much
lower than that determined by the weight of their bilateral trade and/or the number of
their partners.
27The position of the “diagonal” line has been rescaled to take into account that 13 countries are sharing
the ﬁst position in the out-degree ranking.
37
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 9 –
Local and global centrality, 2007. Respectively unweighted and weighted network
0 50 100 1500 50 100 150
out−eigenvector rankingout−degree ranking
0 50 100 1500 50 100 150
out−eigenvector weighted rankingout−strength ranking
Note : Since we are confronting ranked measure, in both panels more central countries are closer to the origin. Diﬀerent
colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. In panel (a) of the ﬁgure the origin of the 45 °line has been rescaled
so to take into account that 13 countries were ranking ﬁrst in the Out-degree centrality measure. Trade data come from
BACI-CEPII dataset.
38
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
4. Sectoral Trade Networks: Bananas, Cement, Movies, Oil, Footwear and
Engines
One of the great advantages of the BACI-CEPII database is the possibility of entering
into bilateral trade ﬂows in great detail. The data used since now is an aggregation of
more than 5000 sectoral data, which is now worth looking at using the sociograms and
the data selection procedure used for ﬁgure 3.
Since the scope of this section is just to scratch the surface of the network analysis of
sectoral data,28we have selected some sectors according to some speciﬁc product charac-
teristics or to their relevance in the world trade. The sectors we have selected are: Ba-
nanas (Hs6-1992: 80300, Bananas, including plantains, fresh or dried), Cement (Hs6-1992:
252329, Portland cement), Movies (Hs6-1992: 370610, Cinematograph ﬁlm, exposed and
developed, width >35m), Oil (Hs6-1992: 270900, Petroleum oils, oils from bituminous
minerals, crude), Footwear (Hs6-1992: 640399, Footwear, sole rubber, plastics uppers of
leather) and Engines (Hs6-1992: 870323, Automobiles, spark ignition engine of 1500-3000
cc). We follow the same compression scheme that we followed in ﬁgure 2 and ﬁgure 3,
selecting only the major two import ﬂows for every country, and considering the binary
(unweighted) version of the resulting trade matrix. The visualization of each country is
proportional to its out-degrees.
4.1. Bananas
International trade in bananas has been a topic of both academic research (Josling and
Taylor, 2003) and policy debate (Anania, 2009). Characterized by preferential schemes,
strong international conﬂict and an important role of fair-trade independent agencies,
according to FAO, bananas are one of the most important foods for both consumption
and trade. More than 81 million tonnes of bananas were produced in 2007, 20% of them
are exported. They are the fourth most important food staple in the world and the ﬁfth
most-traded agricultural commodity (after cereals, sugar, coﬀee and cocoa), generating
billions of dollars of earnings.
In ﬁgure 10 for every country in the network we recorded only the ﬁrst two importing
partners in terms of import ﬂows in 2007. The size of the circle associated to each country
is proportional to the country’s out-degree.
International trade in bananas looks geographically segmented, with the major role played
by Asia, on one side, and Latin America, on the other. The Asian regional trade is dom-
28For a more systematic sectoral network analysis see De Benedictis and Tajoli (2010) and Barigozzi,
Fagiolo and Garlaschelli (2010), where the structure of the sectoral network and its topological properties
are related to the complexity of the good traded internationally. Some network analyses of speciﬁc
sectors are Amighini and Gorgoni (2013) and Bl´ azquez and Gonz´ alez-D´ ıaz (2012) on the automotive
sector, Akerman and Larsson (2010) on arms trade, Beretta, Maggioni, Uberti and Beretta (2013) on
miscellaneous goods.
39
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 10 –
World Trade Network in Bananas (major two importing partners, 2007)
ABW
AFGALBANT
AREARGARMATG
AUSAUTAZE
BENBFA
BGDBGR
BHRBIHBLRBLX
BLZBMU
BOL
BRABRB
BRNCAN
CHE
CHL
CHNCIVCMRCOLCRI
CYMCYP
CZE
DEUDMA
DNKDOM
DZAECU
EGYESPEST
ETHFIN
FRAGBR
GEOGHAGRC
GTM
GUYHKGHND
HRV HUN
IDN
INDIRL
IRN
IRQISL
ISRITA
JAM
JORJPNKAZ
KENKGZ
KHMKNA
KORKWTLAOLBNLBYLCA
LKALTU
LVA
MACMARMDA
MDVMEXMKD
MLIMLT
MNG
MOZMRTMYSNCL
NERNIC
NLDNOR
NPLNZL
OMN
PAKPAN
PER
PHLPOL
PRKPRT
PRYQATROM
RUS
RWASAU
SDNSEN
SGPSLV
SOMSVK
SVNSWESYC
SYR
THA
TJKTTO
TUN
TUR
TWN
TZAUGAUKR
URYUSA
UZBVCT
VEN
VGB
VNM
YEMYUG
ZAFZARZMB
ZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. 30
disconnected countries are not included. Country labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list
of the countries included in the analysis). The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees.
Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is
drawn using Pajek .
inated by the Philippines (PHL), with China (CHN), Thailand (THA), Malaysia (MYS)
and Vietnam (VNM) as followers, while the Latin American sectoral trade is dominated
by Ecuador (ECU), with Costa Rica (CRI) and Colombia (COL) in a supportive posi-
tion. North American and especially European countries (the main sectoral importers
together with China, Japan and Russia) are clearly integrated with the Latin American
trade sub-network, with the partial exception of France (FRA) that acts as a bridge with
the African sub-network. Africa, with the leading role played by Cˆ ote d’Ivoire (CIV), and
India (the main producer of bananas, by far) operate in a decentralized position.
Finally, two cases are noteworthy. Brazil (BRA) is neatly separated from the rest of Latin
American countries and orbits around the Asian trade system by the attractive role played
by Egypt (EGY). On the other extreme of ﬁgure 10, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(VCT) plays the role of a hub in the small islands bananas trade system.
The sectoral trade system is also characterized by 30 isolated nodes (not shown in ﬁgure
40
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
10) and by three isolated small sub-systems in Africa (with South Africa (ZAF) as a hub),
South America and South Asia.
Apart from the country-by-country relations, the sector is characterized by an oligopolistic
structure were six or seven very large ﬁrms dominate the market. This could also further
explain, together with the trade preferences guarantied by the European Union to the
members of the Africa, Caribbean and Paciﬁc (ACP) trade partnership, some of the
features in ﬁgure 10.
4.2. Cement
After water, the second most consumed material in the world is concrete. Economic
growth and concrete are cemented together: modern buildings and public infrastructures,
such as roads, bridges, dams, schools, sewers and hospitals are made of concrete. In
spite of that, the cement and concrete industry has been widely studied because of the
homogeneity and the very limited spatial mobility of the products in question. (Syverson,
2004) (Syverson, 2006) focuses on ready-mixed concrete, the ﬂuid compound made of
cement, sand, gravel, water, and some chemical additives. The product “has a low value-
to-weight ratio and is highly perishable - it absolutely must be discharged from the truck
before it hardens.” Proximity to costumers is therefore unavoidable and “... foreign trade
in ready-mixed concrete is essentially nonexistent.” In fact, in the BACI-CEPII Hs (or
Sitc) classiﬁcation there is no code corresponding to ready-mixed concrete. Looking for
an as hardly tradable product than concrete, we now examine the World Trade Network
of the main ingredient of it: Portland cement.
Often referred to as OPC (Ordinary Portland Cement,) Portland cement is the most
common type of cement in general use around the world. It is a ﬁne powder produced
by grinding cement clinker (between 90 and 95%) and gypsum and up to 5% of minor
constituents. The cement clinker usually originates from limestone, and that’s make it a
“local good”: it is heavy, cheap, and limestone is largely available on local markets.29
Cement is produced in 156 countries, and the global production in 2007 is around 2700
million tonnes. The supply of cement is however not homogeneously distributed across
countries. China accounts for half of the world’s production and India is a distant second,
with a production of 183 million tonnes. The top ten producing countries account for
70% of total cement production.
Portland cement is indeed an hardly tradable product: 95% of world production is con-
sumed domestically.30That is reﬂected in the picture emerging from ﬁgure 11, which is
29The market for OPC is however far from perfect competition. Domestic markets are highly concen-
trated, incumbent ﬁrms often form cartels (Levenstein and Suslow, 2006; R ¨oller and Steen, 2006) and
high capital costs and the access to limestone reserves act as an entry barrier for potential entrants.
30Germany is the major exporter of Portland cement, followed closely by Belgium and China; the US
are the major importer, followed by The Netherlands and France.
41
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 11 –
World Trade Network in Portland Cement (major two importing partners, 2007)
AFG
AGOALB
ANTAREARG
ARM
AUS
AUTAZEBDI
BENBFA
BGD
BGRBHR
BIH
BLRBLXBMUBOL
BRABRB
BRNCAN
CHECHLCHNCIV
CMRCOLCRI
CUBCYP
CZEDEUDMA
DNKDOMDZA
ECUEGY
ESP
ESTETH
FIN
FJIFRAGAB
GBR
GEO
GHAGIN
GMBGNB
GNQGRCGTM
HKGHND
HRVHTIHUN
IDNINDIRL IRN
IRQISLISR
ITAJAM
JOR
JPN
KAZKEN
KGZ
KHMKNA
KOR
KWT
LAOLBN
LBRLBY
LKALTU
LVAMACMAR
MDGMEXMKD
MLTMMRMNG
MOZMRT
MUSMWI
MYSNCLNER
NGANIC
NLDNORNPLNZLOMN
PAKPAN
PER
PHL
PNG
POLPRK
PRTQAT
ROM
RUSRWASAU
SDN
SEN
SGP
SLB
SLESLV
SOMSUR
SVKSVNSWE
SYCSYR
TGOTHATJKTTO
TUN
TURTWNTZA
UGA UKRUSA
UZBVEN
VNMVUTWSMYEM
YUGZAFZAR
ZMB
ZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. Country
labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list of the countries included in the analysis). The size
of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees. Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical
regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek .
quite diﬀerent from that in ﬁgure 10. Though China and other Asian countries, such ad
Japan (JPN), Indonesia (IND) and Thailand (THA), stand out from the crowd, there is
no major evidence of any central players. Trade is dominated by distance. Bilateral links
are especially among adjacent countries; continental links are neatly separated in the case
of Latin American countries, less so in the case of African or European countries, even if
some patterns are evident: a “mediterranean” sub-network is clustered at the north-east
of ﬁgure 11, incorporating India and Pakistan (linked to Egypt and Morocco, in turn);
and a Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa clustered at the south-east of the ﬁgure.
In general, it is as if continental trade links were superimposed one on top of the others,
with no countries acting as a predominant attractors. This is the eﬀect of the little
relevance of international trade in the sector, together with the fundamental role of intra-
ﬁrm trade by construction services multinationals, and non-tariﬀ barriers (USITC, 2011).
42
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
4.3. Movies
Trade in cultural goods (books, recorded music, painting, movies and the like)31is rapidly
growing, at a rate which is more than ﬁve times the average rate of growth of total
global trade (UNESCO, 2005). Trade is remarkably concentrated, being in the hands of
a handful of countries, and in some cases, such the one of the US, cultural products is an
export industry of comparable size with respect to traditional manufacturing industries.
Moreover, trade in cultural goods is also studied as a way of quantifying countries’ cultural
proximity (Disdier et al. , 2009).32In ﬁgure 12 we focus on movies only. The centrality
of the US is more than evident. It is the global hub of the trade network in movies.The
existence of regional clusters is also evident. Italy (ITA), France (FRA), the UK (GBR)
and also Russia have a predominant position in the European trade system, exporting to
francophone and anglophone African countries, and to the Middle Est. Mexico (MEX) and
Argentina (ARG) play the same role in Latin America, as India (IND) in Asia with Japan
(JPN), and Thailand (THA), Korea (KOR) and Hong Kong (HKG) (not China) acting
has bridges between the East and the West. Also the United Arab Emirates (ARE) acts
as a regional hub. Language and cultural models are inﬂuencing the cluster formation,
but, in any case, the trade system is not continentally segmented and only a minority of
32 countries (not included in ﬁgure 12) looks disconnected from the giant component of
the network.33
4.4. Crude Oil
In the crude oil trade network Russia (RUS) plays a central role in the European trade
system, with Kazakhstan (KAZ) acting as a secondary hub in Central Asia. The country
acts as a bridge between Europe an China.
31The deﬁnition of cultural goods is time-varying and lacks consensus. Recently the UNESCO (2005)
provided a new deﬁnition of cultural goods to take account the revolution in ITC, modern art and social
habits. Cultural goods and services are “ ... tangibles and intangibles conveying cultural content that
might take either the form of a good or a service, [and also] the goods and services which are required to
produce and disseminate such content [...] as well as ancillary services even if they are only partly cultural
in their content.” Disdier, Tai, Fontagne’ and Mayer (2009) uses this deﬁnition (and the BACI-CEPII
database,) focusing on goods.
32A further relevant question is the one of the consequences of globalization in determining a convergence
in social habits or imposing a dominant “way of life”. Olivier, Thoenig and Verdier (2008) shows that
the reduction of national varieties associated with the trade-induced “selection eﬀect,” and the resulting
cultural convergence, can counterbalance the welfare eﬀect of goods market integration. Francois and van
Ypersele (2002) shows that“national exception”protectionist measures are welfare enhancing if consumers
love variety and ﬁrms care about the scale of production.
33Marvasti and Canterbery (2005) investigates US exports in motion pictures at the beginning of the
’90s, ﬁnding for a sample of 33 countries a positive impact of language, education and religion on export
ﬂows. Hanson and Xiang (2011) uses data on trade in movies to quantify global exports ﬁxed costs and
their prevalence over bilateral export ﬁxed costs.
43
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 12 –
World Trade Network in Movies (major two importing partners, 2007)
ABWAFGAGO
ALB
ANTARE
ARGARM
ATGAUSAUT
AZE
BFABGD
BGRBHR
BIH
BLRBLX
BOLBRA
BRBBRNBTN
CANCHE
CHLCHN
CIV
CMRCOL
CRICUB
CYMCYPCZEDEU
DMADNK
DOMDZA
ECUEGY
ESP
EST
ETHFINFJI
FRA
GABGBRGEO
GHAGRC
GTMHKG
HNDHRV
HUN
IDNINDIRL
IRNIRQ
ISLISR
ITA
JAMJOR
JPN
KAZKEN
KGZKHM
KORKWTLBNLBY
LCALKA
LTULVA
MACMAR
MDA
MDGMDV
MEXMKD
MLIMLTMMR
MNGMOZ
MUS
MWIMYS
NCLNGA
NICNLDNOR
NPLNZLOMN PAK
PANPERPHL
PNGPOLPRK
PRT
PRYQATROM
RUSRWA
SAUSDN
SENSGP
SLVSVKSVN
SWESYR
THATTOTUNTUR
TWNTZAUGA
UKR
URYUSA
VCT
VENVNMWSMYEM
YUGZAFZMB
ZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. 32
disconnected countries are not included. Country labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list
of the countries included in the analysis). The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees.
Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is
drawn using Pajek .
In recent years, China has been investing heavily in Kazakhstan’s oil and in the country’s
infrastructure, including pipelines, highways and rail roads, and reﬁneries. China’s pur-
chases of Kazakhstan’s oil, gas and minerals has booming, and Hong Kong is the gateway
to China.
Latin American countries appears as composed of two separate cohesive sub-groups. On
one side, Venezuela (VEN), Mexico (MEX), Ecuador (ECU) coordinate the northern
cluster and Brazil (BRA), Argentina (ARG) and Colombia (COL) coordinate the southern
one, both groups of leading countries keep the intra-continent trade connected and they
also link the continent to the rest of the world. Saudi Arabia (SAU) and the United
Arab Emirates (ARE) are dominant in the Middle East and are projected towards Asia,
being paced between China (CHN) and Japan (JAP). It is worth noting the regionally
decentralized position of Iran (IRN), gravitating towards Europe.
India (IND) and the US (USA) also emerge as central played. Finally, African countries,
such as Nigeria (NGA) and South Africa (ZAF), are placed in between Europe, Asia and
South America, with Angola (AGO) and Algeria (DZA) playing a reinforcing position.
The Oceanic regional system is the most peripheral one.
44
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 13 –
World Trade Network in Oil (major two importing partners, 2007)
ABW
AGOALB
ANT
AREARG
AUSAUTAZE
BDIBGDBGR
BHRBIHBLR
BLX
BLZBMUBOL BRA
BRNBTN
CAFCANCHE
CHL
CHNCIV
CMRCOGCOL
CRICUB
CYMCYPCZEDEUDNK
DOM
DZA
ECUEGYESPEST
ETHFIN
FJIFRAGAB
GBRGEO
GHA
GINGNQ
GRC
GTMGUY
HKG
HNDHRV
HTIHUN
IDNINDIRL
IRN
IRQISL
ISR
ITA
JAM
JORJPNKAZ
KENKGZ
KORKWT
LAOLBNLBYLCA
LKALTU LVA
MARMDA
MDGMEXMKD
MLIMLT
MMR
MOZ
MRTMUS
MWI
MYS
NCLNER
NGA
NICNLDNOR
NZLOMN
PAKPANPER
PHL
PNGPOL
PRKPRT
PRY
QATROMRUS
RWASAUSDNSEN
SGPSLVSVK
SVNSWE
SYR THATJKTTO
TUNTUR
TWN
TZAUGAUKR
URY
USAUZBVCT
VENVGB
VNM
VUTYEMYUG
ZAFZAR
ZMBZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. 27
disconnected countries are not included. Country labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list
of the countries included in the analysis). The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees.
Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is
drawn using Pajek .
4.5. Footwear
The footwear sector is one of the most important sector in international trade. In 2007, 12
billions of pairs of shoes were traded internationally and the trend is still growing. In spite
of the theory of the international product cycle, the sector has not been fully transferred
to new industrialized countries: 9 out of top 15 exporters are European countries, still.
On the other hand, China is the largest exporter, by far (with some 35% of total world
exports).
Figure 14 shows how the footwear network is polarized around China (CHN) and Italy
(ITA), acting as the loci of the sectoral trade system. Among the other European coun-
tries, Germany (DEU), France (FRA) and Spain (ESP) look prominent, followed by Por-
tugal (PRT), Romania (ROM) and Denmark (DNK). The UK (GBR) has a totally de-
centralized position with respect to the rest of Europe.
Thailand (THA) and especially Vietnam (VNM) are the satellites of China (CHN) in the
45
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 14 –
World Trade Network in Footwear (major two importing partners, 2007)
ABWAFG
AGOALBANT
ARE
ARGARM
ATGAUSAUT
AZE
BDI
BENBFA
BGDBGR
BHRBIH
BLR
BLXBLZBMU
BOLBRA
BRBBRN
CAF
CANCHE
CHLCHN
CIV CMRCOGCOL
CRI
CUBCYMCYP
CZE
DEU
DMA
DNKDOMDZA
ECUEGYESP
ESTETH
FINFJI
FRA
FSMGABGBRGEOGHA
GINGMBGNB
GNQGRC
GTMGUY
HKGHND
HRV
HTIHUN
IDN
IND
IRLIRNIRQ
ISL
ISRITA
JAMJOR
JPNKAZ
KENKGZ
KHMKNAKORKWT
LAOLBN
LBRLBY
LCALKALTU
LVAMAC
MARMDA
MDGMDV
MEXMHL
MKDMLIMLT
MMRMNG
MOZMRT
MUS
MWIMYS
NCLNERNGA
NICNLD
NOR
NPLNZLOMN
PAK
PANPERPHLPNGPOL
PRK
PRTPRYQATROM
RUS
RWASAU
SDNSEN
SGPSLB
SLE
SLVSOM
SUR
SVKSVN
SWESYC
SYR
TCDTGO
THATJKTKM TTOTUN
TUR
TWNTZA
UGAUKR
URYUSAUZB
VCTVENVGB
VNMVUT
WSM
YEM
YUGZAFZAR
ZMB
ZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. 1
disconnected country is not included. Country labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list of
the countries included in the analysis). The size of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees.
Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is
drawn using Pajek .
Asiatic trade system, with Hong Kong in an intermediate position between the US (USA),
India (IND) and Pakistan (PAK) and Latin American countries, such as Brazil (BRA),
El Salvador (SLV) and Colombia (COL), with Panama (PAN) at the extreme periphery.
A bird-eye view of the sectoral network show a much more dense cluster in the case of
China’s international relations, while for Italy it looks more sparse.
4.6. Engines
A similar topological structure can be observed also in the Automobile Engine sector,
another sector of major importance in international trade. Germany (DEU) acts as an
European focal node, while Japan (JPN) is the Asiatic one. The picture is made a little
bit more complex by the role of subsequent major players. The US (USA) acs as a third
pole, more close Japan than to Germany. The Asian system is also inﬂuence by the
46
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 15 –
World Trade Network in Engines (major two importing partners, 2007)
ABW
AFGAGO
ALBANT
AREARGARMATG
AUS
AUTAZE
BDIBEN
BFABGD
BGRBHR
BIHBLR
BLXBLZ
BMUBOL
BRA
BRBBRN
BTNCAF
CAN
CHECHL
CHN
CIVCMR
COGCOLCRI
CUBCYMCYPCZE
DEUDMA
DNKDOM
DZA
ECUEGY
ESPESTETH
FINFJI
FRAFSMGAB
GBRGEO
GHA
GIN
GMB
GNB
GNQGRCGTM GUY
HKGHND
HRVHTI
HUNIDN
IND
IRL
IRNIRQISLISR
ITAJAMJORJPN
KAZKENKGZKHM
KNA
KORKWT
LAOLBN
LBR
LBYLCA
LKA
LTU
LVAMAC
MARMDAMDGMDVMEXMHL
MKD
MLI
MLTMMR
MNG
MOZ
MRTMUSMWI
MYS
NERNGA
NIC
NLD
NORNPL
NZLOMN
PAK
PANPERPHL
PNGPOL
PRK
PRTPRY
QAT
ROMRUSRWASAU
SDNSEN
SGPSLBSLESLV
SOMSUR
SVKSVN
SWESYCSYRTCD
TGOTHATJK
TKMTTO
TUNTUR
TWNTZA
UGAUKR
URY
USAUZB
VCT
VENVGBVNM
VUTWSM
YEM
YUGZAF
ZARZMBZWE
Pajek
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. Country
labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list of the countries included in the analysis). The size
of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees. Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical
regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek .
role of South Korea (KOR), Thailand (THA) and Singapore (SGP). Notwithstanding its
major role of a producer, the position of China (CHN) in the Engine trade networks
looks marginal, close to the Russian Federation (RUS) and orbiting around the European
cluster.
In the European trade system, we can notice the role of the UK (GBR), France (FRA) and
Spain (SPA) and of some new European member countries, such as the Czech Republic
(CZE), Hungary (HUN) and Lithuania (LTU), exploiting their convenient geographical
location and lower labor costs to boost international fragmentation of production from
old European member countries.
Finally, while Latin American countries are in general closer to the Japan and US orbit, it
is worth noting the peculiarity of the sub-network, constituted by Brazil (BRA), Argentina
(ARG) and Uruguay (URY) which will be disconnected from the rest of the global sectoral
network if it were not for the link with Mexico (MEX) and, through it, with the US.
47
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
4.7. Centrality in sectoral data
It is of course possible to calculate centrality measures starting from sectoral data. Using a
visual comparison similar to the one of ﬁgure 9, we can compare local andglobal centrality
measures. For each of the six sectors discussed in the previous session, ﬁgure 16 plots
together the rankings of out-degree and out-eigenvector measures for each of the 178
countries of our dataset. An overall outlook at ﬁgure 16 shows a quite important level of
dispersion common to all sectors, although diﬀerent for each one. Like in the case of ﬁgure
9, it means that the relative position of a country in a network changes if we take into
consideration local rather than global centrality measures. In some cases, this dispersion
is less evident in the lower part of the diagonal (see for instance the bananas, footwear
and engines sectors). It follows that the main gap between local and global centrality
measures occurs for those countries less integrated in the world trade, i.e. holding a low
position in the centrality ranking of the sectoral network, both in terms of Out-strength
and Out-eigenvector indices. Conversely, countries playing an important role in sectoral
trade - both as main players or neighbors of them - and holding a key position in the
centrality ranking, do not display any diﬀerence between local and global measures. The
dispersion is associated to geographical regions as well. Diﬀerently from ﬁgure 9, countries
belonging to the same continent are not clustered together above or below the diagonal
but hold a scattered position, and this is true in all sectors selected.
A speciﬁc analysis for single sector provides additional insights. The Portland cement
sector (ﬁgure 16(b)) - which has the most fragmented network structure, as showed in
ﬁgure 11 - presents the highest level of dispersion all along the diagonal. It means that
countries that are key players at local level become less important when the ”eﬀect of
others” (i.e. the structural component) is taken into consideration, and vice versa. On
the contrary, the Footwear sector (ﬁgure 16(e)) characterized by a dense and duopoly
structure, as seen in ﬁgure 14 - shows the lowest level of dispersion compared to the other
sectors. In this case, a relative wider dispersion below the line denotes that countries are
less central when their position is measured by a global centrality index with respect to a
local one.
48
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Figure 16 –
Strength and Eigenvector centralities at the sectoral level, 2007.
(a) Bananas 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking (b) Portland Cement 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 0 20 40 60 80 100 140 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking 
(c) Movies 
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking (d) Crude Oil 
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking 
(e) Footwear 
0 50 100 150 0 50 100 150 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking (f) Engines 
0 50 100 150 0 50 100 150 
out−eigenvector weighted ranking out−strength ranking 
Note : Only the import ﬂows from the ﬁrst and second trade partner are taken into consideration for each country. Country
labels are the iso3 country codes (see the Appendix for a complete list of the countries included in the analysis). The size
of the circle associated to each country is proportional to out-degrees. Diﬀerent colors correspond to diﬀerent geographical
regions. Trade data come from BACI-CEPII dataset. The network is drawn using Pajek .
49
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
5. Conclusions
In this paper we explore the World Trade Network through the lens of Network Analysis
introducing the reader to some of the techniques used to visualize, calculate and syn-
thetically represent network trade data. In particular, we show diﬀerent visualizations
of the network and describe its topological properties, producing and discussing some
of the commonly used Network’s statistics, and presenting some speciﬁc topics. To do
this, we make use of the BACI dataset; this latter, constantly updated by the CEPII and
largely available, oﬀers the richness of the UN Comtrade database in terms of number
of countries, large period of time, disaggregated product level, but with the advantage of
signiﬁcantly reducing the number of missing values. We show that Network Analysis is
a useful tool to describe bilateral trade relations among countries, characterized by high
dimensionality and strong heterogeneity. This latter is highlighted and measured in terms
of the position of each country in the trade network according to its relative centrality.
Centrality measures can be local, taking into considerations only the direct links of a
country (i.e. its neighborhood) or global (when we consider the eﬀect of third countries).
These latter, in particular, are of some interest to show on the one hand the strong changes
in trade relations occurred in the past decades, on the other hand the complexity of the
structure of World Trade Network. However, if the majority of countries are strictly
connected to each other, their position in terms of centrality as drawn from local and
global indicators tends to coincide. In dense networks the global position of a country can
be inferred by its local one.
It follows that the global indicators are particularly suitable for the analysis of countries
with an intermediate degree of integration. Their relative position within the World Trade
Network can vary greatly depending on the neighbors centrality, the type of trade ﬂow
considered (global or sectoral ﬂows), as well as the type of bilateral relationship, in its
unweighted (i.e. binary) and weighted (e.g. trade ﬂows) version.
In particular, looking at unweighted centrality measures, the increased importance of some
Asian countries has been highlighted. A more traditional picture, however, has emerged in
the case of weighted indices. The result is a framework that emphasizes the importance of
US and European countries as a player in international trade (degree and strength indices),
the centrality of US as a hub in the World Trade Network (closeness, eigenvector), the
importance of China as a partner of the major advanced countries (eigenvector).
Looking at sectoral data, the network visualization of some selective products puts em-
phasis - once more - on the extreme heterogeneity of data, showing markets mainly char-
acterized by an oligopolistic structure and remarkably polarized networks.
We just scratched the surface of possible analyses that can be done using the BACI-CEPII
dataset in a network framework. For instance, the interested reader can easily replicate
the same analysis that we have done in this paper, comparing years before and after the
50
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
ﬁnancial crisis and the great trade collapse of the end of 2008. The 1995-2010 centrality
measures for the 178 countries in the dataset, which is available for downloading at the
CEPII databases page allow an immediate comparison. Moreover, the Stata ,RandPajek
scripts included in the Appendix 7 make it possible to apply the same techniques used in
this paper to diﬀerent dataset, so as to encourage the empirical trade analyst to explore
the possibilities oﬀered by network analysis. To conclude, the paper suggests that a net-
work approach can be fruitfully applied in several contexts of international trade analysis.
From the seminal paper by Casella and Rauch (2002), the interest of international trade
economists to the role played by networks of international relations as evolved, bring-
ing together theory and empirical analysis (Goyal and Joshi, 2006; Chaney, 2011). The
focus on the structural dimension of trade relations and on the interdependence among
countries, that is the starting point of Network Analysis, can nicely complement other
empirical analyses (such as the gravity model). This very approach can be used to ad-
dress issues where systemic eﬀects can be relevant, such as the transmission mechanisms
of international shocks, the role of the extensive and the intensive margins in trade dy-
namics, the relationship between multilateralism and regionalism, and the impact of new
emerging countries in the World Trade Network. Furthermore, network indices can be
applied in an innovative manner to the study of country economic performance, providing
complementary information to the one of the most commonly used measures in empirical
international trade analysis.
51
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
6. Appendix: Data and indicators
Table 5 – Iso3 Country codes, Country names and Geographical Regions
iso3 Country Continent/Geographical region Color iso3 Country Continent/Geographical region Color
ABW Aruba Latin America Green KWT Kuwait Middle East Pink
AFG Afghanistan South Asia Orange LAO Laos East Asia Purple
AGO Angola Africa Blue LBN Lebanon Middle East Pink
ALB Albania Europe Red LBR Liberia Africa Blue
ANT Netherlands Antilles Latin America Green LBY Libya Africa Blue
ARE United Arab Emirates Middle East Pink LCA Saint Lucia Latin America Green
ARG Argentina Latin America Green LKA Sri Lanka South Asia Orange
ARM Armenia Middle East Pink LTU Lithuania Europe Red
ATG Antigua and Barbuda Latin America Green LVA Latvia Europe Red
AUS Australia Australia Navy MAC Macau East Asia Purple
AUT Austria Europe Red MAR Morocco Africa Blue
AZE Azerbaijan Middle East Pink MDA Moldova Europe Red
BDI Burundi Africa Blue MDG Madagascar Africa Blue
BEN Benin Africa Blue MDV Maldives South Asia Orange
BFA Burkina Faso Africa Blue MEX Mexico Latin America Green
BGD Bangladesh South Asia Orange MHL Marshall Islands Australia Navy
BGR Bulgaria Europe Red MKD Macedonia Europe Red
BHR Bahrain Middle East Pink MLI Mali Africa Blue
BIH Bosnia and Herzegowina Europe Red MLT Malta Europe Red
BLR Belarus Europe Red MMR Myanmar East Asia Purple
BLX Belgium-Luxembourg Europe Red MNG Mongolia East Asia Purple
BLZ Belize Latin America Green MOZ Mozambique Africa Blue
BMU Bermuda North America Yellow MRT Mauritania Africa Blue
BOL Bolivia Latin America Green MUS Mauritius Africa Blue
BRA Brazil Latin America Green MWI Malawi Africa Blue
BRB Barbados Latin America Green MYS Malaysia East Asia Purple
BRN Brunei Darussalam East Asia Purple NCL New Caledonia Australia Navy
BTN Bhutan South Asia Orange NER Niger Africa Blue
CAF Central African Republic Africa Blue NGA Nigeria Africa Blue
CAN Canada North America Yellow NIC Nicaragua Latin America Green
CHE Switzerland Europe Red NLD Netherlands Europe Red
CHL Chile Latin America Green NOR Norway Europe Red
CHN China East Asia Purple NPL Nepal South Asia Orange
CIV Cote d’Ivoire Africa Blue NZL New Zealand Australia Navy
CMR Cameroon Africa Blue OMN Oman Middle East Pink
COG Congo Africa Blue PAK Pakistan South Asia Orange
COL Colombia Latin America Green PAN Panama Latin America Green
CRI Costa Rica Latin America Green PER Peru Latin America Green
CUB Cuba Latin America Green PHL Philippines East Asia Purple
CYM Cayman Islands Latin America Green PNG Papua New Guinea East Asia Purple
CYP Cyprus Europe Red POL Poland Europe Red
CZE Czech Republic Europe Red PRK North Korea East Asia Purple
DEU Germany Europe Red PRT Portugal Europe Red
DMA Dominica Latin America Green PRY Paraguay Latin America Green
DNK Denmark Europe Red QAT Qatar Middle East Pink
DOM Dominican Republic Latin America Green ROM Romania Europe Red
DZA Algeria Africa Blue RUS Russian Federation Europe Red
ECU Ecuador Latin America Green RWA Rwanda Africa Blue
EGY Egypt Africa Blue SAU Saudi Arabia Middle East Pink
ESP Spain Europe Red SDN Sudan Africa Blue
EST Estonia Europe Red SEN Senegal Africa Blue
ETH Ethiopia Africa Blue SGP Singapore East Asia Purple
FIN Finland Europe Red SLB Solomon islands Australia Navy
FJI Fiji Australia Navy SLE Sierra Leone Africa Blue
FRA France Europe Red SLV El Salvador Latin America Green
FSM Micronesia Australia Navy SOM Somalia Africa Blue
GAB Gabon Africa Blue SUR Suriname Latin America Green
GBR United Kingdom Europe Red SVK Slovak Republic Europe Red
GEO Georgia Middle East Pink SVN Slovenia Europe Red
GHA Ghana Africa Blue SWE Sweden Europe Red
GIN Guinea Africa Blue SYC Seychelles Africa Blue
GMB Gambia Africa Blue SYR Syria Middle East Pink
GNB Guinea-Bissau Africa Blue TCD Chad Africa Blue
GNQ Equatorial Guinea Africa Blue TGO Togo Africa Blue
GRC Greece Europe Red THA Thailand East Asia Purple
GTM Guatemala Latin America Green TJK Tajikistan Central Asia White
GUY Guyana Latin America Green TKM Turkmenistan Central Asia White
HKG Hong Kong East Asia Purple TTO Trinidad and Tobago Latin America Green
HND Honduras Latin America Green TUN Tunisia Africa Blue
HRV Croatia Europe Red TUR Turkey Middle East Pink
HTI Haiti Latin America Green TWN Taiwan East Asia Purple
HUN Hungary Europe Red TZA Tanzania Africa Blue
IDN Indonesia East Asia Purple UGA Uganda Africa Blue
IND India South Asia Orange UKR Ukraine Europe Red
IRL Ireland Europe Red URY Uruguay Latin America Green
IRN Iran Middle East Pink USA United States North America Yellow
IRQ Iraq Middle East Pink UZB Uzbekistan Central Asia White
ISL Iceland Europe Red VCT Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Latin America Green
ISR Israel Middle East Pink VEN Venezuela Latin America Green
ITA Italy Europe Red VGB Virgin Islands Latin America Green
JAM Jamaica Latin America Green VNM Vietnam East Asia Purple
JOR Jordan Middle East Pink VUT Vanuatu Australia Navy
JPN Japan East Asia Purple WSM Samoa Australia Navy
KAZ Kazakhstan Central Asia White YEM Yemen Middle East Pink
KEN Kenya Africa Blue YUG Serbia and Montenegro Europe Red
KGZ Kyrgyzstan Central Asia White ZAF South Africa Africa Blue
KHM Cambodia East Asia Purple ZAR Congo Dem. Rep. Africa Blue
KNA Saint Kitts and Nevis Latin America Green ZMB Zambia Africa Blue
KOR South Korea East Asia Purple ZWE Zimbabwe Africa Blue
Note : The column “color” includes the color corresponding to each Geographic Region in the paper’s ﬁgures. See ﬁgure 2
as an example.
52
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
7. Appendix: R, Stata and Pajek routines
7.1. Appendix: Calculating networks cumulative distributions in R
The following R-script allows to import in Rthe data in Pajek format. The dataset
b2007.net including 2007 aggregated bilateral trade ﬂows from the BACI-CEPII database
is in Pajek net format; importing it in Rrequires the igraph library. The read.graph
transforms the Pajek format in an igraph graph object.
R code
library(igraph)
w2007_full <- read.graph("~ /data/b2007.net", format="pajek")
summary(b2007)
The summary command generates the following outcome:
IGRAPH D-W- 178 22002 --
attr: id (v/c), x (v/n), y (v/n), z (v/n), weight (e/n)
IGRAPH indicates that this is an igraph graph. The subsequent four bits denote the graph:
the ﬁrst ‘D’ is for directed graphs (‘U’ for undirected). The second, blank in our case,
is ‘N’ if the graph has the ‘name’ vertex attribute set. The third is ‘W’ for weighted
graphs, if the ‘weight’ edge attribute is set. The fourth is ‘B’ for bipartite graphs. The
subsequent two numbers, indicate the number of vertices (i.e. 178) and the number of
arcs in the directed graph (i.e. 22002), and after a double dash, eventually, the name of
the graph. Now we can use the data to generate the in-degree and out-degree cumulative
distributions as in ﬁgure 5.
R code
dd.in <- degree.distribution(w2007_full, mode="in", cumulative=TRUE)
dd.out <- degree.distribution(w2007_full, mode="out", cumulative=TRUE)
plot(dd.in, xlab="in-degree and out-degree", ylab="cumulative frequency",col=2, type="l", main="",
xlim=c(1,210), ylim=c(0.01,1.2)) \\
lines(dd.in, col="light grey", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=4)
lines(dd.in, col="2", type="l")
points(177,dd.in[177], col="2", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=1)
text(196, 0.03, "US / China / Italy", srt = 0, font = 3, col = 2, cex = 0.7) #Add text; "srt" rotates
to 0 degrees, font = 3 == italic; degrees: 177 \\
points(92,dd.in[92], col="2", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=1)
text(102, dd.in[92], "Congo", srt = 0, font = 3, col = 2, cex = 0.7) # degrees: 92
text(134, dd.in[145], "Tunisia", srt = 0, font = 3, col = 2, cex = 0.7) # degrees: 145
points(145,dd.in[145], col="2", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=1)
text(26, 1.04, "Micronesia", srt = 0, font = 3, col = 2, cex = 0.7) # degree: 24
points(24,dd.in[24], col="2", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=1)
text(119, dd.in[129], "Uganda", srt = 0, font = 3, col = 2, cex = 0.7) # degree: 129
points(129,dd.in[129], col="2", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=1)
lines(dd.out, col=4, type="l")
lines(dd.out, col="light grey", type="p", cex=0.8, pch=4)
lines(dd.out, col="4", type="l")
par(fig=c(0.07, 0.5, 0.07, 0.5), cex=0.6, new = T)
plot(dd.in, log="xy", col=2, type="l", xlab="", ylab="")
lines(dd.in, log="xy", col="light gray", type="p", cex=0.6, pch=4, xlab="", ylab="", axes=FALSE)
lines(dd.in, log="xy", col="2", type="l")
lines(dd.out, log="xy", col=4, type="l", xlab="", ylab="")
par(fig=c(0.0, 1, 0.0, 1), cex=1, new = T)
53
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
7.2. Appendix: A brief note on Stata routines for network centrality mea-
sures
The following commands allows to reproduce in Stata 12 the centrality measures included
in the paper. Some of them are straightforward (degree and strength,) and therefore are
not included. The others require a little bit of manipulation, that we guide through the
following do ﬁle.
Stata code
*** Closeness ***
/*Since it is based on an adjacency matrix, the Stata SGL package consider the value of the link as distance by default;
an higher trade flow among two countries is interpreted as higher distance,
that is why we need to normalize and take the inverse of the trade flow when computing adjacency based centrality measures */
summ w
g w_average = w/r(mean)
g inv_w = 1/w_average
*directed closeness defined over Clos-OUT
netsis i j, measure(distance) name(A, replace) weight(inv_w) directed
netsummarize (rows(A)-1):/rowsum(A), generate(clossw_out) statistic(rowsum)
*directed closeness defined over Columns: Clos-IN
netsis i j, measure(distance) name(Aaa, replace) weight(inv_w) directed
netsummarize (cols(Aaa)-1):/colsum(Aaa), generate(clossw_in) statistic(colsum)
/*Note that in order to compute In/Out centrality measures for directed (weighted or unweighted) networks you need
to calculate the indexes over Columns or Rows, here an example for closeness, but it works the same also
for degree and strength. */
*** Eigenvector centrality ***
/*When compute the eigenvector centrality for directed (weighted or unweighted) SGL package reports by default the
right leading eigenvector, measuring the relative importance of the nodes that point to the considered vertex.
In order to get the left eigenvector just invert the vertex order ij -> ji. */
*IN
netsis i j, measure(eigenvector) name(E, replace) directed weight(w)
netsummarize E, generate(eigenw_in) statistic(rowsum)
*OUT
netsis j i , measure(eigenvector) name(E, replace) directed weight(w)
netsummarize E, generate(eigenw_out) statistic(rowsum)
7.3. Appendix: Pajek routines for network visualization
The following commands allows to reproduce in Pajek (3.07 version) the visualizations
showed in Figs. 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8. Visualizations on your computer screen could be
sometimes slightly diﬀerent from the ﬁgures in the paper, mainly because of diﬀerent
personal settings. Be sure the general patterns match only.
Pajek code
In order to replicate Figure 2:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_2.paj"
The project file load in the associated work space a Network a Partition and a Vector.
Note that: Partitions store discrete characteristics of the vertices (in this case continents clusters);
Vectors stores continuous attributed of each node (in this case Indegree).
The Network files contains an array of the links among nodes (and their labels),
moreover in this version the file contains also the geographical coordinates of each node.
"Network -> Create Vector -> Centrality ->## "
In order to produce other vectors with alternative centrality measures:
54
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
"Draw -> Network"
Will draw the graph for the network loaded into Pajek memory -- first slot of the network section.
Note: coordinates need to be scaled to a range [0,1].
"Draw -> Network + First Partition"
Now the resulting graph associates a different color to each category of the partition file
(in such a case continents). \\
"Draw -> Network+ First Partition+ First Vector"
Visualize Network with colors for each continents and node size proportional to vector attribute
(in-degree in this case). \\
In order to replicate Figure 3:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_3.paj"
Drawing commands are the same of Figure_2, but in this case the xy coordinates of each node are
those produced by one of the optimization algorithms build in Pajek (namely the Kamada-Kawai force algorithm).
Note that each time you run the Kamada-Kawai, as well as other optimization procedures, the coordinates
of the single node may be different, the overall relation (distance) between nodes does not change,
only the visualization does; if you want to replicate exactly the graph you see you need to save
the network leaving the graph window open. In such a way Pajek will save the network with
the xy coordinates used to produce the graph.
In order to replicate Figure 6:
Graph 6A:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_6A.paj"
The project file loads in the associated work space a Network (the exports flows among 178 countries in 2007)
and a Partition (the continents clusters). \\
"Network -> Create Vector->Centrality->Degree->Output" will create a vector of out-degree flows
In order to narrow the size of network to 25\% of world flows (i.e. larger flows):
"Network -> Create new network -> Transform -> Remove -> Lines with value -> Lower than->#"
"Network -> Create partition -> Valued core -> First threshold and step -> All"
Type the # in the dialog box asking for the threshold and type the highest flows value in a second dialog box.
"Operations-> Vector+Partition-> Extract subvector-> 1- *" will extract the vector of countries whose
flows are above the threshold. \\
"Operations->Network + Partition-> Extract Subnetwork -> 1- *" will create the new network of countries
whose flows are above the threshold.\\
"Partitions ->Extract sub-partition ->1- *" to maintain different colors of continents
(make sure that the original continents clusters and the created partitions below and above
the threshold are selected as the first and second partition respectively in the Partitions menu).
Now load Vector named "OutdegreeMainPlayers" storing the out-degrees referred to the main 17 players.
"Draw-> Network+ First Partition + First Vector" to visualize Network with colors for each continents
and node size proportional to vector attribute (out-degree in this case).
Note: nodes size needs to be scaled.
Graph 6B:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_6B.paj"
The project file loads the same Network and Partition of Fig.6A and a Vector which stores GDP values.
In order to narrow the size of network to 50\% of world flows:
"Network -> Create new network -> Transform -> Remove -> Lines with value -> Lower than->##"
Repeat the same commands as Fig.6A:
"Network -> Create partition -> Valued core -> First threshold and step -> All"
Type the ## in the dialog box asking for the threshold and type the highest flows value in a second dialog box.
"Operations-> Vector+Partition-> Extract subvector-> 1- *"
"Operations->Network + Partition-> Extract Subnetwork -> 1- *"
"Partitions ->Extract sub-partition ->1- *" to maintain different colors of continents (make sure that the
original continents clusters and the created partitions below and above the threshold are selected as the
first and second partition respectively in the Partitions menu).
"Draw-> Network+ First Partition + First Vector"
Note: nodes size needs to be scaled.
Graph 6C:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_6C.paj"
The project file loads the same Network and Partition of Fig.6A and a Vector which stores per
capita GDP values. In order to narrow the size of network to 75\% of world flows, follow the same
command of Fig.6B selecting the corresponding threshold ###
Graph 6D:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_6D.paj"
The project file loads the same Network and Partition of Fig.6A and a Vector which stores openness indexes
(i.e. export to GDP). In order to narrow the size of network to 90\% of world flows though maintaining all
countries (i.e. included nodes with links value below the threshold):
"Network -> Create new network -> Transform -> Remove -> Lines with value -> Lower than->####"
"Draw-> Network+ First Partition + First Vector" to visualize the whole Network with colors for
each continents and node size proportional to vector attribute (openness in this case).
Note: nodes size needs to be scaled.
55
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
In order to replicate Figure 7:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_7.paj"
The project file loads a Network (the exports flows among 178 countries in 2007), a Partition
(the continents clusters) and a Vector (the per capita GDP attribute).
"Operations->Network + Partition->Extract SubNetwork" and, because Europe is the third class in the partition,
select class 3 in the dialog box that appears.
Select again the original continent partition in the Partition drop-down menu then:
"Operations->Vector + Partition->Extract Subvector" and select again 3 in the dialog box.
Before drawing the network be sure that the new subnetwork is selected as the first in each
drop-down menu of the Main screen.\\
"Draw ->Network + First Partition + First Vector"
If necessary, energize it to obtain a drawing similar to Figure 7 choosing the Kamada-Kawai->Free command
from the Layout->Energy menu (this command produces regularly spaced results, especially for
connected networks that are not very large).
In order to replicate Figure 8:
"File -> Pajek Project File -> Read -> Figure_8.paj"
The project file loads a Network (the exports flows among 178 countries in 2007) and a Partition
(the continents clusters).\\
"Operations->Network + Partition->Shrink Network" and select 1 in the dialog box asking for the minimum
number of connections between clusters and accept the default value (zero) in a second dialog box.
"Draw->Network + First Partition"
To get a picture more similar to Figure 8 some manipulations are needed. Pajek chooses the label of the
first vertex of a class that is shrunk and adds a pound sign (#) to obtain a label for the shrunken class.
For example, Albania happens to be the first European country in the network, so the vertex that represents
this continent carries the label "#ALB" in the shrunken network. We added the names of continents to
Figure 8 manually by editing the shrunken partition with the File->Partition->Edit command.
Loops are not visible in the Draw screen: they appear once exported the drawing as a picture.
56
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
References
Akerman A. and Larsson A. (2010) The global arms trade network 1950-2007, Stockholm
University Working Paper , 2.
Amighini A. and Gorgoni S. (2013) The international reorganization of auto production,
The World Economy , forthcoming.
Anania G. (2009) How would a wto agreement on bananas aﬀect exporting and importing
countries?, ICTSD Programme on Agricultural Trade and Sustainable Development,
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development , 21.
Anderson J.E. and vanWincoop E. (2003) Gravity with gravitas, American Economic
Review , 93, 170–192.
Barigozzi M., Fagiolo G. and Garlaschelli D. (2010) The Multi-Network of International
Trade: A Commodity-Speciﬁc Analysis, Physical Review E , 81, 046104.
Beretta S., Maggioni M.A., Uberti E.T. and Beretta S. (2013) Books, butter and guns:
networks and distances in international trade, mimeo .
Bl´ azquez L. and Gonz´ alez-D´ ıaz B. (2012) International automotive production networks:
How the web comes together, mimeo .
Bonacich P. (1972) Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores and clique iden-
tiﬁcation, The Journal of Mathematical Sociology , 2, 1, 113–120.
Bonacich P. (1987) Power and centrality: A family of measures, The American Journal
of Sociology , 92, 5, 1170–1182.
Bonacich P. and Lloyd P. (2001) Eigenvector-like measures of centrality for asymmetric
relations, Social Networks , 23, 191–201.
Borgatti S.P. (2005) Centrality and network ﬂow, Social networks , 27, 1, 55–71.
Bowen H., Hollander A. and Viaene J. (2012) Applied International Trade , Palgrave
Macmillan.
Butts C.T. (2008a) network: A Package for Managing Relational Data in R, Journal of
Statistical Software , 24, 2, 1–36.
Butts C.T. (2008b) Social Network Analysis with sna, Journal of Statistical Software , 24,
6, 1–51.
Cartwright D. and Harary F. (1977) A graph theoretic approach to the investigation of
system-environment relationships, Journal of Mathematical Sociology , 5, 87–111.
Casella A. and Rauch J.E. (2002) Anonymous Market and Group Ties in International
Trade, Journal of International Economics , 58, 1, 19–47.
Chaney T. (2011) The Network Structure of International Trade, NBER wp , 16753.
Clauset A., Shalizi C. and Newman M. (2009) Power-Law Distributions in Empirical Data,
SIAM Review , 51, 4, 661–703.
Combe D., Largeron C., Egyed-Zsigmond E. and G´ ery M. (2010) A comparative study of
57
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
social network analysis tools, International Workshop on Web Intelligence and Virtual
Enterprises .
Csardi G. and Nepusz T. (2006) The igraph software package for complex network re-
search, International Journal of Complex Systems , 1695.
Davis D.R. and Weinstein D.E. (2001) What Role for Empirics in International Trade?,
in:Bertil Ohlin: A Centennial Celebration, 1899-1999 , Findlay, Jonung and Lundahl,
eds., MIT Press, Cambridge.
De Benedictis L. and Tajoli L. (2010) Comparing Sectoral International Trade Networks,
Aussenwirtschaft , 65, 167–189.
De Benedictis L. and Tajoli L. (2011) The World Trade Network, The World Economy ,
34, 8, 1417–1454.
de Nooy W., Mrvar A. and Batagelj V. (2011) Exploratory Social Network Analysis with
Pajek , Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences, Cambridge University Press.
Dijkstra E.W. (1959) A note on two problems in connexion with graphs, Numerische
Mathematik , 1, 269–271.
Disdier A.C., Tai S.H.T., Fontagne’ L. and Mayer T. (2009) Bilateral trade of cultural
goods, Review of World Economics , 1, 269–271.
Fagiolo G., Reyes J. and Schiavo S. (2008) On the Topological Properties of the World
Trade Web: A Weighted Network Analysis, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications , 387, 15, 3868–3873.
Feenstra R.C. and Taylor A.M. (2008) International Trade , Palgrave Macmillan Limited.
Felbermayr G. and Koheler W. (2005) Exploring the Extensive and Intensive Margins of
World Trade, Review of World Economics , 142, 4, 642–674.
Fisman R. and Wei S.J. (2004) Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from “Missing
Imports” in China, Journal of Political Economy , 112, 2, 471–500.
Fisman R. and Wei S.J. (2009) The Smuggling of Art, and the Art of Smuggling: Uncov-
ering the Illicit Trade in Cultural Property and Antiques, American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics , 1, 3, 82–96.
Francois P. and van Ypersele T. (2002) On the protection of cultural goods, Journal of
International Economics , 56, 2, 359–369.
Fruchterman T. and Reingold E. (1991) Graph Drawing by Force-directed Placement,
Software - Practice and Experience , 21, 11, 1129–1164.
Gabaix X. (2009) Power Laws in Economics and Finance, Annual Review of Economics ,
1, 255–93.
Gabaix X. (2011) The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica , 79,
733–772.
Garlaschelli D. and Loﬀredo M.I. (2005) Structure and Evolution of the World Trade
Network, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications , 355, 138–144.
58
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Gaulier G. and Zignago S. (2010) BACI: International Trade Database at the Product-
level - The 1994-2007 Version, CEPII Working Paper , 23, 1–28.
Goodreau S.M., Handcock M.S., Hunter D.R., Butts C.T. and Morris M. (2008) A statnet
Tutorial, Journal of Statistical Software , 24, 9, 170–192.
Goyal S. (2009) Connections: An Introduction to the Economics of Networks , Princeton
University Press.
Goyal S. and Joshi S. (2006) Bilateralism and Free Trade, International Economic Review ,
47, 3, 749–778.
Hanson G. and Xiang C. (2011) Trade Barriers and Trade Flows with Product Het-
erogeneity: An Application to U.S. Motion Picture Exports, Journal of International
Economics , 83, 2, 14–26.
Helpman E. and Krugman P. (1985) Market structure and foreign trade: increasing re-
turns, imperfect competition and the international economy , Mit Press.
Helpman E., Melitz M. and Rubinstein Y. (2008) Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Part-
ners and Trading Volumes, Quarterly Journal of Economics , 123, 2, 441–487.
Jackson M. (2010) Social and Economic Networks , Princeton University Press, Princeton
University Press.
Javorcik B.S. and Narciso G. (2008) Diﬀerentiated Products and Evasion of Import Tariﬀs,
Journal of International Economics , 76, 208–222.
Josling T.E. and Taylor T.G. (2003) Banana Wars. The Anatomy of a Trade Dispute ,
Wallingford: CABI Publishing.
Kali R. and Reyes J. (2007) The Architecture of Globalization: A Network Approach to
International Economic Integration, Journal of International Business Studies , 38, 4,
595–620.
Kamada T. and Kawai S. (1989) An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs,
Information processing letters , 31, 12, 7–15.
Katz L. (1953) A new status index derived from sociometric analysis, Psichometrika , 18,
1, 39–43.
Levenstein M.C. and Suslow V.Y. (2006) What determines cartel success?, Journal of
Economic Literature , 44, 1, 43–95.
Marvasti A. and Canterbery E.R. (2005) Cultural and other barriers to motion pictures
trade, Economic Inquiry , 43, 1, 39–54.
Miura H. (2012) Stata graph library for network analysis, The Stata Journal , 12, 1, 94–
129.
Moreno J. (1934) Who shall survive? , Beacon Press, New York.
Newman M. (2010) Networks: An Introduction , OUP Oxford.
Olivier J., Thoenig M. and Verdier T. (2008) Globalization and the dynamics of cultural
identity, Journal of International Economics , 76, 2, 356–370.
59
CEPII Working Paper Network Analysis of World Trade using the BACI-CEPII dataset
Opsahl T. (2009) Structure and Evolution of Weighted Networks , University of London
(Queen Mary College), London, UK.
R Development Core Team (2007) R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Com-
puting , R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Riccaboni M. and Schiavo S. (2010) Structure and growth of weighted networks, New
Journal of Physics , 12.
R¨oller L.H. and Steen F. (2006) On the workings of a cartel: Evidence from the norwegian
cement industry, The American economic review , 96, 1, 321–338.
Rotunno L. and V´ ezina P.L. (2012) Chinese networks and tariﬀ evasion, The World Econ-
omy, 35, 12, 1772–1794.
Scott J. (2000) Social Network Analysis: A Handbook , SAGE Publications.
Syverson C. (2004) Market structure and productivity: A concrete example, Journal of
Political Economy , 112, 6, 1181–1222.
Syverson C. (2006) Markets: Ready-mixed concrete, Journal of Economic Perspectives .
UNESCO (2005) International ﬂows of selected cultural goods and services, 1994-2003 ,
Montreal, UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
USITC (2011) Gray portland cement and cement clinker from japan, U.S. International
Trade Commission , Investigation No. 731-TA-461 (Third Review), Publication 4281.
Vega-Redondo F. (2007) Complex Social Networks , Econometric Society Monographs,
Cambridge University Press.
Wasserman S. and Faust K. (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications ,
Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences, Cambridge University Press.
Zenou Y. (2012) Networks in Economics, Cepr discussion papers , 9021.
60
