#TrésorEconomics  No. 274  December 2020  p.1 Direction générale du Trésor
No. 274  December 2020
Vulnerability of French and European imports
Christophe Bonneau, Mounira Nakaa
The COVID-19 crisis has revived the debate on th e vulnerability  of global value chains, particularly the dependence 
on imports for domestic production.
Over the past 20 years, France has gradually integrated itself into global value chains: its manufacturing production 
directly uses nearly 40% foreign inputs, more than half of whic h come from European countries. This phenomenon 
is common to all European countr ies and France is less dependen t than Germany on foreign inputs.
In order to identify which goods  are "vulnerable", we analysed the extra-European imports  of about 5,000 product 
categories, taking into account (1) the concentration of import s of each product based on the number of non-EU 
supplier countries, and (2) the centrality of the product, i.e.  whether alternative sources  exist in other countries.
According to this methodology, th e vulnerability of French impo rts from outside the EU appears to be low: we 
counted 121 products for which imports appear to be concentrate d (see chart on this page),  including chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals, metals and some capital goods 
(e.g. LED lamps, machine tools, accumulators, 
etc.). Among these concentrated products, we 
identified 12 vulnerable p roducts, i.e . with low 
diversification potentia l. France has a lower 
number of vulnerable pr oducts than its main 
European neighbours. For a quarter of these products, the main non-European supplier is 
China. 
The identification  of these vulnerab ilities should not 
obscure the advantages of sourcing from abroad, 
both in terms of economic efficiency and security of supply, including in  times of crisis.French imports by vulnerability 
Sources: BACI (2020) data for 2018 on a total of around 5,000 products (HS6), 
and DG Trésor calculations.

Direction générale du Trésor #TrésorEconomics  No. 274  December 2020  p.21. France's producti on, like that of its ne ighbours, mostly dep ends on EU 
suppliers
1.1 France's participation in global value chains 
has generated both benefits and dependencies
Like all major economies, France has gradually 
become part of global value  chains (GVCs), in which 
production process are broken up between several 
countries and involve produc ts crossing an increasing 
number of borders during manufacturing.1 Participation 
in GVCs has led to  higher competitiv eness for firms, 
since outsourcing some segments of production has allowed them to focus on higher value-added activities, 
such as R&D, design and  some manufacturing 
activities, and has increas ed their competitiveness on 
both the export and  domestic markets.
2 Increasing 
integration into G VCs has also resulted in gains in 
purchasing power for  French consumers.3 
This development has als o pushed up the share of 
foreign inputs in manufacturing production from 29% to 39% over the last 20 years ( see Chart 1). The sector 
most dependent on foreign input is the energy sector, 
which relies on commodities s uch as crude oil, followed 
by the textile industry, which has experienced the 
largest increase in dependen cy over the past 20 years 
(from 24% in 2000  to 60% in 2019). Conversely, the 
food industry relies mostly  on French-made inputs. In 
addition to the loss of manufacturing jobs, which has 
partly been caused by the increase in imports over 
recent decades,
4 this trend raises questions about how 
exposed the French industr ial sector is to risks of 
disruption of supply from abroad. Chart 1: The share of foreign inputs in France's 
manufacturing production5
Source: MRIO6 and DG Trésor calculations.
Note: The share of foreign inputs corresponds to the volume of 
imported intermediary goods used in manufacturing production. 
1.2 This increased reliance on foreign inputs is 
also observed in France's European neighbours
France's industrial manufacturing production for 2019 
was more dependent on foreign inputs than that of Italy 
and Spain, but less than t hat of Germany, Poland and 
the Netherlands (see Chart 2).7 These six countries 
have experienced a significant increase in their dependence on foreign inputs  over the past 20 years. 
European countries are first and foremost integrated 
into European value chains:
8 the EU-27 is the direct 
source of the majority of fore ign inputs for five of the six 
countries in our sample (the Netherlands being the 
exception). Despite the risi ng participation of emerging 
countries in global trade flo ws, this share has remained 
stable over the past 20 years,9 and has even increased 
(1) Berthaud, F., "France's Trade in Value Added", Trésor-Economics  No. 207, October 2017.
(2) World Bank, "Trading for Development in the Age of Global Va lue Chains", World Development Report , 2020, p. 67.
(3) Emlinger, C. and Fontagné, L., "(Not) Made in France", La Le ttre du CEPII N° 333, June 2013. Estimate computed from the 201 0 database.
(4) Malgouyres, C., "The Impact o f Chinese Import Competition on  the Local Structure of Employment and Wages: Evidence from Fra nce", 
Journal of Regional Science , 57(3), 2017.
(5) For the sake of readability, some industrial sectors (such a s paper, leather, plastics and wood) are not detailed in the br eakdown but are 
included in the total.
(6) Asian Development Bank, "Compilation and Uses of the Multi-C ountry Input-Output Tables: Lessons from the ADB MRIO Database" , July 
2019.
(7) The data in this study on t he exposure of some countries to foreign supply may be overestima ted because of the "Rotterdam e ffect", by 
which some goods are counted as  imports (and then exports) by s imply passing through the country in question, a phenomenon whi ch is 
particularly marked in countries  with large logistics hubs. In addition, relatively smaller ec onomies naturally rely on more e xternal supply to 
meet their demand.
(8) The geographical origin retained in this study is that of di rect imports into the countries  studied, and not the ultimate o rigin of the value-
added through the value chains. See section 2.1.
(9) Comparisons with 2000 are based on the current perimeter of the EU-27. 

#TrésorEconomics   No. 274   December 2020   p.3  Direction générale du Trésorfor France, Germany, Italy and Poland. As regards 
inputs imported fro m China, value-added trade data 
show a limited level of dep endence in 2019, between 
1.4% and 2.0% for every European country in our 
sample, with the notable exception of the Netherlands (4.7%). Even taking into account indirect dependencies 
(e.g. electronic goods im ported from Germany but 
which incorporate Chines e components), studies 
showed the actual level of French dependence on 
Chinese inputs to be 3.2% in 2014.
10
Analysing trade in value-added terms makes it possible 
to highlight a country's sec toral dependencies on its 
partners. However, it does not allow for an identification 
of the supply disruption risks which might hamper production, including when  the products in question 
only represent a small part of production. Chart 2: The share  of foreign inputs  in manufacturing 
production in 2019
Source: MRIO and DG Trésor calculations.
Note: The share of foreign inputs corresponds to the volume of 
imported intermediary goods used in manufacturing production. 
2. France's supply vulnerabilit ies are limited compared to its main 
neighbours
2.1 An analysis of the vulnerability of imports at a 
granular level
Through an analysis of bilateral trade data11 at a 
disaggregated level (about 5,000 products),12 it is 
possible to identify the degr ee of vulnerability of each 
imported product.13 
A product is considered vulnerable if its imports are 
concentrated among a limited number of third countries 
(those outside the EU-27) c ombined with low potential 
for diversifying supplier countries14 (see Box 1 for a 
methodological overview) . One limitat ion of this 
methodology is that it is b ased solely on import data and does not include country -specific production data. 
Indeed, using both trade and production data would not 
allow for vulnerability analysi s at such a detailed level,15 
or for comparative analysi s with other countries. 
Another limitation lie s in the impossibilit y of isolating re-
export flows in these data, and thus of detecting indirect 
vulnerabilities through Tier  2 or higher suppliers.16 The 
results presented below therefore constitute a 
preliminary approach to t he analysis of supply 
vulnerabilities, which in some aspects might be 
overstated (in particular b ecause of potential local 
production) and in others un derstated (in particular 
because of indirec t vulnerabilities).
(10) Gerschel E., Martinez A. and Méjean I., "Propagation of Sho cks in Global Value Chains: The Coronavirus Case", IPP Policy Brief  No. 53, 
March 2020.39%45%
30%36%64%
41%
22%27%
17%19%30%
26%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%
France Germany Italy Spain Netherlands PolandForeign share EU share
(11) Guillaume Gaulier and Soledad Zignago, (2010) "BACI: Intern ational Trade Database at the Product-Level. The 1994-2007 Vers ion", CEPII 
Working Paper 2010-23. The data used is for 2018. 
(12) Products are defined using the Harmonized System (HS) nomen clature at the 6-digit level. Ev en at this granular level of di saggregation, 
each category may still contain products with different technic al characteristics. 
(13) The present analysis focus es on imported products regardles s of their final use (intermediat e consumer goods, final consum er goods or 
capital goods).
(14) Throughout this study, the term "supplier" refers to countr ies rather than firms, as global trade data do not allow for in dividual firm data to be 
distinguished.
(15) Concordance tables match one category of production activit y to several categories of im ported goods, resulting in a loss of detailed 
information.
(16) For example, if France impor ts a good from Germany, these d ata do not make it possible to  distinguish whether it is the sa me good from 
China, imported into Germany and re-exported to France, or a go od produced in Germany and exported to France.
Direction générale du Trésor #TrésorEconomics  No. 274  December 2020  p.4Box 1: Vulnerability analysis methodology for imports
The vulnerability of a c ountry's imports is assessed here in re lation to non-EU-27 countries for each imported 
product. The products examined i n this analysis are solely thos e with low availability on  the Europea n market, 
which is measured by extra-Europ ean imports above 50% of total imports. The analysi s is based on two 
indicators: 
1. The degree of concentration of  non-EU-27 supplier countries in the product's imports. Concentration is 
measured using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI).a The higher the index value, the more imports are 
concentrated among a small number of trading partner countries.
2. The diversification potential  of the product in the short ru n, measured as the risk of "centrality"b of the product, 
or how dependent the global supply is on a limited number of su pplier countries. The centr ality risk of a product 
is considered to be high when it is above 2.5 (the level at whi ch the leading exporter of a given product supplies 
about two-thirds of global exports).
We looked at HHI values above 0. 5 to identify the most concentr ated and therefore most vulnerable imports.c
Representing products according to  their levels of concentratio n and centrality makes it  possible to establish a 
mapping of imported products (see Figure 1):
Products which are vulne rable because of a high 
level of concentration and a limited potential for 
diversification: the conc entration and centrality 
indices are both high (res pectively above 0.5 and 
2.5), reflecting a high conc entration of imports with 
limited scope for diversific ation with other supplier 
countries.
Products with a high conc entration level for which 
diversification is possible: the concentration index is high (above 0.5), but the le vel of centrality is low to 
moderate (below 2.5). In  the event of a shock, 
therefore, even if  imports are highly concentrated, 
there are alternative supplier countries, making 
diversification possible . This potential for 
diversification does not  eliminate the risk of 
disruptions in the imports of this category of products 
in the short term, as sourc ing from new suppliers 
may require additional time and costs.Products with limited concentration: these are imported products with a low to moderate concentration index (less than 0.5).
Figure 1: Map of products ac cording to their levels of 
concentration and centrality
Source: DG Trésor calculations.
a. The HHI is calculated for each product as the sum of the squa res of the market shares of each partner country. It varies bet ween 0 and 1.
b. Centrality is measured by comparing the export flows of the s upplier countries for each produc t. For more details regarding the construction of 
the index, see Y. Korniyeko, M. Pinat and B. Dew (2017), "Asses sing the Fragility of Global Tra de: The Impact of Localized Sup ply Shocks 
Using Network Analysis", IMF Working paper  No. 17/30. Centrality risk is  measured for each product indepe ndently of the country studied. 
c. As an illustration, an import HHI of 0.5 may correspond to a situation in which the two main non-EU suppliers account for ab out 75% of total 
extra-European imports. 

#TrésorEconomics   No. 274   December 2020   p.5  Direction générale du Trésor2.2 The vulnerabilities of France's imports are 
limited
An analysis of vulnerabilitie s in French imports from 
outside Europe (using the method detailed in Box 1) 
identifies 121 highly concentrated products out of some 5,000 imported products, i.e. nearly 1% of the total 
value of imports in 2018 (see Chart 3). These products 
include chemicals and pharma ceuticals such as some 
antibiotics,
17 metallurgical products including some 
rare-earth metals18 and capital goods such as 
accumulators and some machine tools.19 China is most 
often the leading supplier of these vulnerable products, 
followed by the United St ates and Switzerland. 
Chart 3: France's vulnerable extra-EU imports 
Source: BACI (2020) data for 2018 and DG Trésor calculations.
Note: The higher the concentration index, the more imports are 
concentrated among a small number of partners. The higher the r isk 
of centrality, the more the global supply of the product depend s on a 
limited number of supplier countri es (see Box 1). The "China" d ots 
refer to products for which Ch ina is France's main supplier.
The average centra lity risk of these concentrated 
products is fairly low, wh ich means that the global 
supply of these products i s ensured by a sufficient 
number of countries and th at it would therefore be 
possible to diversify suppl y sources if necessary. 
Nevertheless, we count 12 concentrated products 
which also have a hi gh level of centrality.20 Among 
these products, which can be labelled as "vulnerable", 
are some categories of LED lamps for which China is 
the main global supplier, which constitutes a high risk of shortage in ca se of a shock.2.3 France is less vulnerable than its European 
neighbours in terms of imports from non-EU countries
France's imports include re latively fewer vulnerable 
products (in number) than t he imports of its main 
European partners (see Table 1). From a sectoral point of view, agri-food products, chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals account for a significant share of 
vulnerable imports from the six countries under study. Italy has a significant proportion of vulnerable products 
in textiles, and Spain is highly vulnerable when it comes 
to construction materials and metallurgical products. 
Approximately 10% of the concentrated products of 
each of these s ix countries show l ow potential for 
diversification, and therefo re greater fr agility in the 
event of failure of the supplier country or countries.
For each of the six countries, China is the main non-EU 
supplier of concentrated products. For Italy, Poland and 
the Netherlands in particu lar, and Spain to a lesser 
extent, China is the main non- EU supplier of virtually all 
vulnerable products. 
However, this comparison must take into account the 
economic characteristics of each country. The moderate number and volume of vulnerable imports in 
France and Germany are mainly explained by their 
larger share of intra-EU imp orts, which automatically 
reduces their vuln erability to non-EU  imports. Other 
factors, such as a country's openness rate and sectoral 
specialisation, also acco unt for the differences.
Comparing the data between these six countries 
reveals some common conc entrated products and 
some risks of indirect concentrations due to re-export 
flows. Approximately 20% of France's concentrated 
products are also vulnerabl e for three or more other 
countries (including phosphorus and some magnesium derivatives). In addition, the Netherlands' concentrated 
products include approximat ely 20 products for which 
the Netherlands is also France's largest supplier. These products could the refore also constitute, indirectly 
through Dutch re-exports, an additional concentration 
risk for France.
(17) Streptomycin and chloramphenicol.
(18) Scandium and yttrium, which a re used in advanced electronic s.
(19) Devices used to manufacture tires.
(20) The 12 vulnerable products identified are LED lamps, flight  simulators, synthetic fibre blankets, two categories of decora tive artificial plants, 
some garden furniture, four types  of clock products, engravings  and antiques.

Direction générale du Trésor #TrésorEconomics  No. 274  December 2020  p.6Sources: BACI (2020), World Development Indicators, Eu rostat and DG Trésor calculations. Data is for 2018.
Note: The openness rate corresponds here to imports of goods an d services as a share of the country's GDP. Vulnerable products  are identified 
for each country using the method detailed in Box 1.
2.4 Vulnerability is lower at European level than at 
country level
If we replicate the previous analysis at the consolidated 
EU-27 level, we find that, out of more than 5,000 
imported products, 483 of them21 (or 7% of the volume 
of imports from non-EU  countries) have a high 
dependency on a small number of non-EU countries.22 
China is the main supplier of approximately 40% of 
these products, including laptops, antibiotics, some rare-earth metals and mag nesium derivatives. The 
latter two have been iden tified by the European Commission as critical c ommodities for strategic 
sectors (3D printing, the  defence sector, etc.).
23 
Half of the products which are concentrated at the 
individual level for the six countries studi ed are not 
concentrated for the EU-27 as  a single trade entity (of 
the 121 concentrated products identified for France, 66 
are not concentrated at the EU -27 level). This indicates 
a potential for di versification wit h other non-EU 
countries which France i s not exploiting but its 
neighbours are.
3. Securing supply chains is a c oncern for firms, governments a nd the 
European Union
3.1 The COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the 
importance of global supply chains
Although we do not yet have the benefit of hindsight, 
the COVID-19 crisis d oes not appear to have 
fundamentally challenged  the organisation of 
production and tra de in value chains. The ability of 
countries to procu re from multiple foreign supply 
partners has contr ibuted to resilienc e in the face of an 
explosion in demand for certain goods, as the 
differentiated exposure of countries to the pandemic and the spread of the shoc k over time also helped 
supply adjust to demand (see Chart 4).
With regard to healthcare goods, the previous analysis 
does not identify any vuln erabilities amon g COVID-19 
medical supplies,24 which shows that the supply 
disruptions observed at the beginning of the crisis were 
more related to a surge in global demand for these 
goods than to a pr e-existing fragilit y related to the 
geographical organisation of GVCs for these 
products.25Table 1: Key figures on countries' vulnerabilities
France Germany Italy Spain Netherlands Poland
Openness rate, extra-EU (% GDP) 13% 19% 16% 19% 65% 23%
Total imports of goods (€bn) 573 1,087 426 330 547 228
Number of concentrated products 121 166 227 269 390 199
Number of concentrated products in common with 
France/3 4 2 9 3 94 2 2 0
Number of concentrated products for which China 
is the largest supplier28 55 85 88 127 68
Number of vulnerable pro ducts (concentrated and 
with low diversification potential)12 19 24 37 36 15
(21) The number of concentrated products for the EU may seem lar ge compared to that of the six countries studied, but it reflec ts the shift from 6 
to 27 countries, which do not nec essarily have many concentrate d products in common. In addition, a number of products which a re 
concentrated at the country level are reflected at the EU level  because of the country's weight in the EU's international trad e (e.g. Germany 
and France). Finally, some countri es are the only importers of certain concentrated products, wh ich effectively increases the number of 
products at the EU level.
(22) Measured by an HHI of non-EU imports greater than 0.5 (as i n the analysis of countr y vulnerabilities).
(23) European Commission (2020), S tudy on the EU's list of Criti cal Raw Materials – Final Report.
(24) List of 44 goods established by  the World Customs Organizat ion, including masks, gowns , testing materials, etc.
(25) This observation remains lim ited by the lack of analysis of  national production data for all countries.
#TrésorEconomics   No. 274   December 2020   p.7  Direction générale du TrésorChart 4: The global trade of COVID-19 
medical supplies in 2020
Source: UNCTAD,26 estimated data.
This crisis nevertheless hi ghlights the vulnerabilities 
created by GVCs, in a context of increasing risks of 
external shocks likely to d isrupt supply chains (shocks 
due to public health, prote ctionism, environment, 
climate, technology, etc.).
The previous analysis provides  a first level of reading, 
offering a disaggregated dia gnosis on a product basis 
and suggesting possible answers based on the 
potential for diversification of highly concentrated 
imports. This analysis could be expanded, first by having industrial stakeholders  identify which inputs are 
considered critical among  vulnerable imports, and 
second by cross-referencing trade data with country-specific (or European) product ion data in these critical 
sectors. A mapping of the various indirect suppliers 
along the production chain would also be useful. 
3.2 There are several ways to reduce supply chain 
vulnerabilities
The risks which weigh on supply chains must first of all 
lead firms to implement str ategies to secure them, 
including diversifying their suppliers.27 Government should also play a role in  sensitive sectors where 
supply chain disruptions would cause negative externalities for society as a whole (e.g. health and 
security). 
A public strategy for securing these sensitive goods or 
sectors could combine searching for greater diversification of supply channels and suppliers (for 
example through public procurement for some goods), 
building up safety stocks, d eveloping recycling (for 
example for raw materials), and if necessary providing 
public support for the development of new domestic 
productive capacities.  In this respect, the France 
Relance  recovery plan includes a €600m measure 
called "Relocate: securing our strategic supplies" 
whose objective is to support private investment, targeted to certain sectors (such as health, agri-food, 
telecommunications, electroni cs and critical industrial 
inputs).
28 These principles also guided the design of the 
action plan to relocate research projects and production 
sites of healthcare product s to France, a plan which 
was presented by the gov ernment on 18 June 2020. 
At European level, a concerted approach makes sense, 
particularly given the s trong interdependencies 
between Member States and  the economic security 
which the single market of fers in the face of rising 
protectionism across the gl obe. The European "open 
strategic autonomy" init iative, launched by the 
European Commission in spring 2020, provides a 
framework for consultation  on the issue of supply 
vulnerabilities and could lead to the development of a 
common definition of goods and services deemed 
"critical". Similar consultati ons could take place at the 
multilateral level (e.g. OECD , WTO) in order to ensure 
that initiatives to secure  supply chains comply with 
world trade rules guaranteeing fair and equitable competition between countr ies. To do otherwise would 
work against the primary objective of ensuring sufficient 
availability of critical supplie s at the global level and for 
each country.
(26) UNCTAD, "Global Trade Update", October 2020.
(27) Manyika, J, Smit, S. and Woet zel, J., "Risk, Resilience, an d Rebalancing in Global Value Chains", McKinsey Global Institute , August 2020.
(28)www.gouvernement.fr/france-relance
Direction générale du Trésor #TrésorEconomics  No. 274  December 2020  p.8 
Publisher:
Ministère de l’Économie, des 
Finances, et de la Relance
Direction générale du Trésor 139, rue de Bercy
75575 Paris CEDEX 12
Publication manager:
Agnès Bénassy-Quéré
Editor in chief:
Jean-Luc Schneider
(01 44 87 18 51)
tresor-eco@dgtresor.gouv.fr
English translation:
Centre de traduction
des ministères économiqueet financier
Layout:
Maryse Dos Santos
ISSN 1962-400X
eISSN 2417-9698
Derniers numéros parus
This study was prepared under the authority of the Direct orate General of the Treasury (DG Trésor) and does not 
necessarily reflect the position of the Ministry  of Economy and Finance.Décember 2020
No. 273  The contribution of creative des truction to productivity growth  in France
Clémentine David, Romai n Faquet, Chakir Rachiq
No. 272  The economic determinants of s ocial crises in Latin America
Colette Debever
November 2020
No. 271  Digitalisation in Fr ance’s business sector
Romain Faquet, Vincent Malardé
No. 270  What do we know about the econom ic impacts of remote work?
Cyprien Batut, Youri Tabet
https://www.tresor.economie.gouv.fr/Articles/tags/Tresor-Eco
 Direction générale du Trésor
 @DGTrésor
Pour s'abonner à Trésor-Éco : tresor-eco@dgtresor.gouv.fr

