 
EN   EN 
 
 
 EUROPEAN  
COMMISSION   
Brussels, 5.5.2021  
SWD(2021) 352 final  
 
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT  
Strategic dependencies and capacities  
Accompanying the  
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions  
Updating the 2020 New Industrial Strategy: Building a stronger Single Market for 
Europe's recovery  
{COM(2021)  350 final}  - {SWD(2021)  351 final}  - {SWD(2021)  353 final}   
 
1 
 COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT  
Strategic dependencies and capacities  
Accompanying the  
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions  
Updating the 2020 New Industrial Strategy: Building a stronger Single Market for 
Europe's recovery  
Executive Summary  
The COVID -19 pandemic has tested the r esilience of economies worldwide. Despite severe 
disruptions in production, transport and people’s mobility, most value and supply chains have 
shown remarkable resilience. Still, the crisis has also highlighted that  while the EU gains 
resilience from world  markets being open and integrated in global value chains, disruptions in 
these global value chains can affect specific essential products and inputs that are particularly 
critical for society and the EU economy. One of the key lessons of the crisis is tha t there is a 
need to get a better grip and understanding of where Europe’s current and possible future 
strategic dependencies lie. This can provide the basis for the development of facts -based and 
proportionate policy measures informed by anticipation to a ddress such strategic dependencies 
while safeguarding the open and trade -based EU economy. In this context, the European Council 
invited the Commission to “ identify strategic dependencies, particularly in the most sensitive 
industrial ecosystems such as fo r health, and to propose measures to reduce these dependencies, 
including by diversifying production and supply chains, ensuring strategic stockpiling, as well as 
fostering production and investment in Europe ”. 
Strategic dependencies affect the EU’s core interests . They  notably relate to areas as regards 
security and safety, the health of Europeans as well as the ability to access goods, services and 
technologies that are key for the green and digital transitions at the core of the EU’s priorities. 
Such st rategic dependencies are more likely to be found in the most sensitive ecosystems, which 
are the focus of this staff working document. This staff working document provides a further step 
towards a more structural, systematic and cross -sector monitoring of the EU’s possible strategic 
dependencies and an additional basis to consider when taking measures to address them.  
Bottom -up mapping of strategic dependencies in the area of products (chapter 2)  
A bottom -up (quantitative) mapping using external trade flows for more than 5,000 products as 
its starting point identifies 137 products in the most sensitive ecosystems where the EU can be 
considered highly dependent on imports from third countries (repre senting about 6% of the 
extra -EU import value of goods). The three main foreign sources of EU import value for these 
dependent products are China (representing about half of import value), Vietnam and Brazil. The 
identified dependent products are situated mainly in the energy intensive industries ecosystem 
 
2 
 (with 99 dependent products identified, including raw/processed materials and chemicals), as 
well as in the health ecosystem (including active pharmaceutical ingredients and other health -
related products)  and other inputs and products that are relevant to support the green and digital 
transformation. Out of the 137 products identified as dependencies in the most sensitive 
ecosystems, 34 (representing 0.6% of extra -EU import value of goods) could be conside red as 
potentially more vulnerable given their possibly low potential for further diversification as well 
as substitution with EU production. At the same time, the EU can also be a source of dependency 
vis-à-vis important trading partners. The analysis pro vides examples of products where the US is 
highly dependent on the EU (“reverse dependencies”) and vice -versa. Furthermore, “common 
dependencies” that the EU and the US share vis -à-vis China and the world can also be identified.  
Reliance on international t rade is not a vulnerability but rather helps to sustain diversified supply 
and demand. Still, some of the identified dependencies could be considered of potential strategic 
importance. Discussing the results of this bottom -up mapping with Member States and  industry 
(e.g. in the context of the Industrial Forum) will allow assessing the exact nature of identified 
dependencies in more detail, including the risks they entail to the resilience and functioning of 
the EU’s industrial ecosystems as well as possible  prospects for reducing these dependencies in 
the future including through the development of alternatives.   
Also internal dependencies may exist within the Single Market whereby the EU relies on a 
limited number of sources within the Single Market, linked  to a concentration of supply or 
activities at the level of individual firms. This underlines the importance of a well -functioning 
Single Market – especially during times of crisis – that also remains open to the global economy.  
Strategic dependencies in t he area of key technologies (chapter 3)  
The Industry Strategy of March 2020 highlighted that the EU should build competitiveness for 
technologies that are strategically important for Europe’s industrial future. Complementary to the 
analysis of trade flows done in chapter 2, an assessment of the EU’s performance as regards the 
generation and uptake of certain key technologies shows both strengths and weaknesses. The EU 
faces particular challenges in comparison with its global competitors for technologies in the 
digital ecosystem such as cloud and micro -electronics. This provides important indications of 
risks concerning future dependencies with regard to these technologies, while not precluding 
possible technological dependencies in other ecosystems. If left unaddressed, dependencies in 
the area of these technologies could further materialise and possibly new ones might emerge. 
Finally, when it comes to the renewables ecosystem, the EU has a strong competitive position in 
several technologies that are of key i mportance to achieve Europe’s climate ambitions (e.g. in the 
area of hydrogen). Still, there are indications of risks concerning possible (future) dependencies 
in this area as well and continued efforts are needed to facilitate scaling up and deployment of  
these technologies.  
Possible policy measures to address strategic dependencies (chapter 4)  
For several of the dependencies identified in the bottom -up analysis of this staff working 
document, work has already been initiated since the March 2020 Industry Strategy to address 
these dependencies or assess them in more detail together with relevant stakeholders. Such 
 
3 
 actions notably include the Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials and the European Raw 
Materials Alliance, the structured dialogue taking place i n the context of the Pharmaceuticals 
Strategy, strengthened foresight in the context of the Chemicals Strategy as well as other specific 
actions with regard to essential products or inputs necessary for the green and digital transition 
(e.g. batteries, sem i-conductors).   
Any possible additional measures to address strategic dependencies need to be tailored to the 
specific nature of the dependency and ecosystem concerned. They would need to build on in -
depth discussion and dialogue with Member States and ind ustry, be proportionate and consider 
all available options and tools. Policy measures can, on the one hand, reinforce the EU’s position 
in global value chains by strengthening and diversifying external trade. Actions under the EU’s 
Trade Policy Review will  promote a level playing field and enable international trade and 
investments to ensure more diversified sources of supply and demand to cushion future shocks 
and enhance competitiveness. On the other hand, the EU can strengthen its own capacity in 
strateg ic areas where necessary with targeted tools and investments in key strategic areas, 
building on the strengths of a fully functioning Single Market and competition policy facilitating 
open and dynamic markets that promote innovation.  
When it comes to possi ble internal dependencies on a limited number of firms within the Single 
Market, the COVID -19 pandemic has shown that the Single Market and its unhindered Treaty 
freedoms should be at the core the Union’s readiness for potential crises. Competition policy,  as 
an enabler of strong business dynamics within the Single Market, as well as the EU’s integration 
into diversified global value chains and undistorted access to export markets are also important 
in mitigating possible risks related to such internal depe ndencies.  
As regard possible strategic dependencies identified in the area of key technologies, the 
Recovery and Resilience Facility provides an important step -up in investments in digital 
technologies, together with other programmes such as Digital Europe . Relevant actions to 
identify and address strategic dependencies are being taken also in the context of the 
Communication on the Digital Decade and the Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence 
and space industries (through an observatory on critica l technologies and technology roadmaps). 
Tools such as Important Projects of Common European Interest  where proved well targeted, 
justified and efficient  as well as industrial alliances can continue to play an important role in 
specific sectors. Targeted r esearch and innovation efforts (such as through Horizon Europe and 
the European Defence Fund) are also key in addressing the EU’s R&I gap in comparison with its 
global competitors and thereby reducing strategic dependencies. Existing capacities (including 
those under the EU space programmes) contribute strongly to the EU’s open strategic autonomy 
and act as a positive lever for multilateral cooperation.  
In-depth reviews of strategic dependencies (chapter 5)  
The in -depth reviews presented in this staff worki ng document provide a selected number of 
analyses across a number of key areas that can be considered strategic, notably raw materials, 
batteries, active pharmaceutical ingredients, hydrogen, semiconductors and cloud and edge 
technologies. These assessment s provide further insights on the origin of strategic dependencies 
and their impact as well as relevant (ongoing) policy measures. They provide a first set of 
 
4 
 analyses for a limited number of specific areas. As a follow -up to this staff working document, 
further such detailed reviews of possible dependencies can be carried out covering other 
strategically important areas, including products, services or technologies key to the twin 
transition, such as renewables or energy storage.    
  
 
5 
 Contents  
1. Context and approach  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  6 
1.1 Terminology and the concepts of “dependencies” and “strategic”  ................................ ............  7 
1.2 Approach of the staff working document  ................................ ................................ ..................  13 
2. Mapping of EU dependencies in the most sensitive ec osystems  ................................ ....................  16 
2.1 Context  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  16 
2.2 Methodology to identify foreign dependencies  ................................ ................................ ..........  19 
2.2.1  Core Dependency Indicators  ................................ ................................ ..............................  19 
2.2.2  Identifying foreign dependencies ................................ ................................ .......................  21 
2.3 Results ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  22 
2.4 Assessing the further vulnerability of dependent products: potential for diversification and 
substitution  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  27 
2.5 Single Market dependencies linked to concentration of economy activity  ..............................  28 
3. EU performance in key technologies and research & innovation  ................................ ................  30 
3.1 Key technologies for (future) competitiveness  ................................ ................................ ..........  30 
3.2 Europe’s research and innovation performance  ................................ ................................ ...... 36 
3.3 Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  41 
4 Policy measures with a potential to address strategic dependencies  ................................ ............  42 
4.1 Relevant measures to address external and internal strategic trade dependencies  .................  42 
4.2 Relevant measures in the area of key technologies  ................................ ................................ .. 48 
5 Reviews of a selected number of strategic areas  ................................ ................................ ............  51 
5.1 Raw materials  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  52 
5.2 Active pharmaceutical ingredients  ................................ ................................ ............................  60 
5.3 Li-ion batteries  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  68 
5.4 Hydrogen  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 77 
5.5 Semiconductors  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  82 
5.6 Cloud and Edge Computing ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  91 
6 Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 1. Context and approach  
The EU economy is both a major importer and exporter on the international stage. Ensuring an 
open and fair trading system is of key importance for the prosperity and future growth of EU 
industry and to the benefit of European consumers and citizens. The EU plays a central role in 
developing a more resilient and open global economy with undistorted trade, investments an d 
mutually beneficial bilateral relations. The COVID -19 crisis demonstrates how the Single 
Market’s integration into global value chains not only maximises economic efficiency but is also 
essential in times of crisis to absorb shocks, offer options to adju st and speed up recovery.1  
At the same time, the Industrial Strategy of March 20202 already underlined the importance for 
the EU of “ reducing dependence on others for things we need the most: critical materials and 
technologies, food, infrastructure, secu rity and other strategic areas ”. The COVID -19 crisis 
further emphasised the relevance of this issue in turbulent and challenging times, as it exposed 
further some strategic dependencies and specific disruptions caught Europe by surprise.  
One of the key le ssons of the crisis is that there is a need to get a better grip and understanding of 
where Europe’s current and possible future strategic dependencies lie. The European Council, 
highlighting that “ Achieving strategic autonomy while preserving an open econ omy is a key 
objective of the Union ”, invited the Commission to “ identify strategic dependencies, particularly 
in the most sensitive industrial ecosystems such as for health, and to propose measures to reduce 
these dependencies, including by diversifying p roduction and supply chains, ensuring strategic 
stockpiling, as well as fostering production and investment in Europe ”.3  
The Commission’s 2020 Strategic Foresight Report4 provided a broad assessment of the EU’s 
and Member States’ resilience. It also intro duced resilience dashboards as a possible tool 
allowing to monitor for the social and economic, geopolitical, green, and digital dimensions of 
resilience. The Commission’s Communication on the Trade Policy Review5 makes the case for 
an open, sustainable and assertive trade policy that contributes to more resilient and sustainable 
value chains by providing a stable rules -based trading framework, opening up new markets to 
diversify sources of supply, and developing c ooperative frameworks for fair and equitable access 
to critical supplies. Identifying and addressing the EU’s strategic dependencies is an essential 
step to increasing resilience. In addition, it is equally important to ensure competitiveness and 
stimulate  investments in technologies that are of key importance for the EU’s future. The 
Communication on the Digital Decade6 presents a vision, targets and avenues for a successful 
digital transformation of Europe by 2030. Finally, this staff working document sho uld also be 
seen in relation with the upcoming 2021 Strategic Foresight Report on Europe’s open strategic 
autonomy.  
                                                           
1 See also OECD: Shocks, risks and global value chains: insights from the OECD METRO model, 2020 and Trade 
Policy Review ( COM(2021)66)  
2 COM(2020)102  
3 EUCO 13/20  
4 COM(2020)493  
5 COM(2021)66  
6 COM(2021)118  
 
7 
 The assessment of strategic dependencies involves not only the identification of dependencies, 
but also an assessment of whether they are of  a strategic nature that leads to a vulnerability for 
the EU, taking into account the risks such dependencies may represent to the EU’s core strategic 
interests.7 This assessment can contribute to the development of facts -based and proportionate 
measures w hile at the same time safeguarding the open and trade -based EU economy.  
The staff working document takes both a bottom -up and a top -down perspective. A bottom -up 
(quantitative) analysis taking trade statistics in products as its starting point, while chara cterised 
by data limitations and caveats, can provide first and indicative insights into areas where the 
EU’s dependence on a limited number of suppliers is most prominent in particular for a number 
of more sensitive ecosystems8. A top -down assessment need s to complement this bottom -up 
approach, taking into account (at a more detailed level) other risks and possible dependencies of 
strategic nature (e.g. related to services, infrastructures, technologies, skills, etc.) that cannot be 
captured by relying on quantitative trade statistics and data. A first qualitative assessment for 
selected areas is presented.  
The analysis presented provides a contribution and a first step to a more systematic monitoring 
of strategic dependencies in the EU’s most sensitive eco systems. It complements actions that 
have already been initiated on the analysis and identification of the EU’s strategic dependencies 
in specific policy fields.9 It is also worthwhile highlighting that other countries (including 
notably the US10) are in th e process of carrying out similar types of analyses to identify possible 
risks and vulnerabilities in global supply chains as well as ways to address them.  
1.1 Terminology and the concepts of “dependencies” and “strategic”  
Key concepts used for the purposes of this staff working document are set out in box 1.  
Box 1 – Terminology and definitions  
The following concepts and definitions are used for the purposes of this staff working document:  
- Resilience : the ability not only to withstand and cope with challenges but also to undergo 
transitions in a sustainable, fair, and democratic manner.11 Resilience is necessary in all 
policy areas, also to undergo the green and digital transitions, while maintaining the EU’s 
core purpose and integrity in a dynamic an d at times turbulent environment;  
- Open strategic autonomy : the ability to shape the new system of global economic 
governance and develop mutually beneficial bilateral relations, while protecting the EU 
from unfair and abusive practices, including to divers ify and solidify global supply chains 
                                                           
7 The concept of “strategic dependency” is furthe r explained in chapter 1.1  
8 The concept of “sensitive ecosystems” is further explained in chapter 1.1  
9 For example in the context of the critical raw materials action plan ( COM(2020)474)  and the Pharmaceutical 
Strategy for Europe (COM(2020)761)  
10 See Exe cutive Order on America’s Supply Chains ( https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing -room/presidential -
actions/2021/02/24/executive -order -on-americas -supply -chains/ )  
11 COM(2020)493  
 
8 
 to enhance resilience to future crises;  
- Strategic capacity : a certain level of capabilities held within the EU allowing to produce, 
provide or rely on strategic goods, services, data, infrastructures, skills, industria l know -
how and technologies12;  
- Dependencies : reliance on a limited number of actors for the supply of goods, services, 
data, infrastructures, skills and technologies combined with a limited capacity for internal 
production to substitute imports13; 
- Strategic  dependencies : dependencies that are considered of critical importance to the 
EU and its Member States’ strategic interests such as security, safety, health and the 
green and digital transformation.  
External and internal dependencies  
Both external and internal dependencies co -exist.  External dependencies concern the EU’s 
reliance on external partners (third countries or firms). Internal dependencies are dependencies 
within the EU Single Market, notably related to the possible concentration of activity a t firm 
level. The risks related to external dependencies are different from the risks related to internal 
dependencies. This is the case, for example, in relation to political tensions and geo -political 
uncertainty, which can be important risks for the EU at an international level. At the same time, 
dependence on a very limited set of companies for supplies in a specific sector can result in 
vulnerabilities even if these companies are based in the EU.14 Such internal dependencies linked 
to a concentration of  supplies can have a potentially important impact on the functioning of EU 
value chains within the Single Market (e.g. in the case of natural disasters or closing down of 
production).   
There are different types of shocks that play a role when assessing th e impact of 
dependencies. Such shocks can be supply -related (e.g. a given supplier within a value chain no 
longer producing or delivering certain goods and services, or in reduced quantities; or the 
country where the supplier is based imposing certain expo rt restrictions) as well as demand -
related (e.g. a sudden important drop in EU or global demand for goods and services, or a sudden 
global rise in market demand for certain goods or services) and they can have multiple origins 
(man -made, natural, etc.). Sc arcity of resources (e.g. related to critical raw materials) is also an 
important element to be taken into account when considering the impact of dependencies and 
shocks. Companies, through their own corporate decisions and corporate policies, play a key r ole 
in mitigating and adapting to possible shocks, as they have the ability to diversify supply and 
demand sources to become more resilient. At the same time, they cannot always accommodate 
all types and magnitudes of unanticipated demand or supply shocks.  
 
                                                           
12 This may include the availability of scalable manufacturing capacities that can be relied on during a crisis 
situation and increase of demand  
13 Dependencies can also be extended to exports and the possibi lity to rely on internal consumption to substitute 
exports  
14 Furthermore, the ownership of companies by EU entities or foreign investors may also be relevant  
 
9 
 Box 2 – Demand and supply shocks during COVID -19 
The EU experienced the impact of different types of shocks to global value chains during 
the COVID -19 crisis.  These shocks were both demand and supply related.  
On the one hand, the pandemic has caused sign ificant effects on the demand side.  The most 
important impact from the crisis across many ecosystems has been the sudden and very 
significant reduction of demand within the EU and on export markets . At the same time, other 
ecosystems saw large peaks in dem and. Most notably, the crisis led to a global surge in the 
demand for medical supplies and devices. This led to shortages in this sector, including for 
example with regard to personal protective equipment and ventilators. Another example of a 
positive dema nd shock has been the global surge in demand for semi -conductors that resulted in 
shortages during the first months of 202115, entailing risks of a slowed down recovery in sectors 
that are dependent on the supply of these semi -conductors (e.g. the automotiv e industry).  
The crisis has also seen important supply related shocks, notably in the health sector.  For 
example, for some key medical supplies, several foreign countries introduced measures 
restricting or banning exports. This worsened the situation of ac ute under -capacity due to an 
exploding global demand in these products in addition to the aggravating factor of reduced 
production capacity due to the fact that many businesses active across global value chains were 
forced to reduce or halt production due to the spread of the virus and health precautions such as 
lockdowns, quarantines and social distancing. Restrictions concerning the movement of people 
and their impact on international transport networks represented another important supply shock.  
Disruptions were also experienced within the EU Single Market.  Several Member States 
introduced exports bans in particular during the early stages of the pandemic. In addition, border 
restrictions, quarantine requirements and other measures limiting free m ovement of persons, 
goods, services also hampered the functioning of supply chains within Single Market.     
Strategic nature of dependencies  
Determining the specific areas and dependencies that are “strategic” for the EU requires a 
careful assessment of the current and future interests at stake and potential risks, building 
on a collective understanding of what matters most and what is critical for Europe. 
Dependencies that are strategic can be identified by taking into account the extent to which they 
affect these core interests. This can only be done on a case -by-case basis, taking into account not 
only quantitative data but also qualitative, ecosystem -specific elements and expert knowledge.  
Firstly, dependencies are likely strategic when they impact th e security and safety of 
Europeans or limit the possibility for the EU to exercise a foreign and security policy in line 
with its values and strategic interests.16 The EU framework for screening of foreign direct 
                                                           
15 Pandemic -related spikes in demand contributed to a shortage of chips, while also being linked to structural 
problems such as distortive government subsidies and export restrictions. Further details are provided in chapter 5.5  
16 It should be noted that the  European Council has also requested the Commission in the context of security and 
defence to prepare “a technology roadmap by October 2021 for boosting research, technology development and 
innovation and reducing our strategic dependencies in critical tec hnologies and value chains” (SN 2/21)  
 
10 
 investment provides a reference in this rega rd, outlining specific infrastructure, technologies and 
inputs that are considered to be critical. Dependencies with an impact on security and safety are 
of particular relevance for the aerospace and defence ecosystem and may also exist in various 
other ec osystems (such as for example digital and electronics). Examples of actions which 
already address strategic dependencies in this area include the Space Strategy for Europe17 aimed 
at reinforcing Europe's autonomy in accessing space in a safe and secure envi ronment, the 
European Defence Action Plan18 towards a strong, competitive and innovative defence industrial 
base, the European Defence Fund19 as well as strengthening the competitiveness of EU security 
industry through investment in civil security research a nd innovation in the Horizon Europe 
Programme20 and most recently the Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and space 
industries21. 
Secondly, the impact on the health of EU citizens is another important driver to define 
dependencies as strategic. For example,  the COVID -19 crisis exposed a number of strategic 
dependencies in the area of health (e.g. access to medical supplies such as personnel protective 
equipment). The European Council has also asked the Commission to “ identify strategic 
dependencie s, particularly in the most sensitive industrial ecosystems such as for health ”. The 
Commission has already initiated work in the context of the Pharmaceuticals Strategy for 
Europe22 with concrete actions to ensure accessibility, availability and affordabil ity of medicines, 
including an assessment of security of supply chains.  
Thirdly, in certain cases dependencies can also be considered strategic when they 
significantly impact the EU’s access to inputs, technologies and services that are key for the 
green and digital transitions at the core of the EU’s priorities.23 The Commission has 
recently reconfirmed the importance of these green and digital ambitions in the context of the 
Recovery and Resilience Facility, requiring that each national recovery and resil ience plan 
includes a minimum of 37% of expenditure related to climate and 20% related to digital. 
Dependencies that have a significant negative impact on the ability of the EU to remain at the 
edge of innovation and transformation towards an increasingly green and digital economy and 
society will ultimately be detrimental to the functioning of the EU economy and the welfare of 
its citizens. The Commission has already recognised the strategic nature of third country 
dependencies in relation to its green and  digital ambitions in several recent initiatives. Such 
dependencies are mainly related to critical inputs needed to support the digital and green 
transition24 as well as the ability of the EU to access key enabling technologies.25   
                                                           
17 COM(2016)705  
18 COM(2016)950  
19 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/defence/european -defence -fund_en   
20 Horizon Europe Cluster 3 – Civil security for society  
21 COM(2021)70  
22 COM(2020)761  
23 Political Guidelines for the Next European Commission 2019 -2024  
24 See for example the Action plan on critical raw materials ( COM(2020)474), the Hydrogen strategy for a climate -
neutral Europe (COM(2020)301), the Commission proposal for a new regulatory framework on batteries 
(COM(2020)798/3)  
 
11 
 Within these areas, the i ndividual nature of the dependency and the degree of risks 
involved need to be assessed.  It is important to underline that a certain reliance on international 
trade and commercial relations and partnerships with companies in third countries do not 
necessar ily give rise to an external dependency that would result in a vulnerability for the EU 
economy. To the contrary, such relations and partnerships help to strengthen the EU’s resilience 
to supply and demand shocks, in addition to the substantial efficiency gains that help to sustain 
the competitiveness of the EU economy over time. Only those dependencies that significantly 
affect the EU’s core interests and limit the EU’s freedom to analyse, make decisions and act 
according to its own priorities can be consi dered strategic.  
Box 3 – FDI screening Regulation, critical raw materials list and Action Plan on synergies 
between civil, defence and space industries  
The strategic nature of certain areas and dependencies has already been established in the  
EU framework for screening of foreign direct investment, the EU’s critical raw materials 
list as well as the recent Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and space 
industries.  
Regulation (EU) 2019/452 establishing a framework for the screening of foreign dire ct 
investments into the Union created a cooperation mechanism for Member States and the 
Commission to screen foreign investment. The mechanism (operational as of 11 October 2020) 
establishes cooperation and the exchange of information between EU Member Sta tes and the 
Commission and provides the possibility to raise concerns related to specific foreign 
investments, where warranted. The Commission may issue opinions when an investment poses a 
threat to the security or public order of more than one Member Stat e or when an investment 
could pose a risk to a project or programme of Union interest. The screening framework also 
establishes core requirements for Member States who maintain or adopt a national screening 
mechanism. In Article 4, the Regulation outlines certain factors that may be taken into 
consideration by Member States or the Commission in determining whether a foreign direct 
investment is likely to affect security or public order. These include potential effects on critical 
infrastructure, critical te chnologies and dual use items and supply of critical inputs.  Several of 
the criticalities defined in this Regulation are of particular relevance for the analysis in this staff 
working document including critical technologies (e.g. artificial intelligence, robotics, 
semiconductors, cybersecurity, aerospace, defence, energy storage, quantum and nuclear 
technologies as well as nanotechnologies and biotechnologies) as well as critical inputs (e.g. raw 
materials).  
The EU’s critical raw materials list provides an  overview of the raw materials that are 
considered to be most important economically and having a high supply risk. The list26 is 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
25 See for example, the White Paper on Artificial Intelligence (COM(2020)65), the joint declaration by Member 
States on processors and semiconductor welcome d by the Commission ( https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -
market/en/news/joint -declaration -processors -and-semiconductor -technologi es)  
26 Available in COM(2020)474  
 
12 
 reviewed every three years by the Commission, based on a comprehensive screening and 
assessment methodology27. The Commission ta kes it into consideration when developing and 
implementing policies relating to raw materials, including when negotiating trade agreements 
and seeking to eliminate trade distortions. It also helps to identify investment needs and guide 
research and innovat ion. 
The Commission’s Action plan on synergies between civil, defence and space industries 
identifies a list of examples of critical technologies relevant across the civil (including 
security), defence and space industry domains. Using this list as a basis , a new EU 
Observatory of Critical Technologies will start, in 2021, regular monitoring and analysis of 
critical technologies, their potential applications, value chains, needed research and testing 
infrastructure, desired level of EU control over them, an d existing gaps and dependencies. Every 
second year, the Observatory, in consultation with key stakeholders, will produce a classified 
report on critical technologies, dependencies, value chains and testing infrastructure for the 
defence, space and related  civil industries. On the basis of these reports, the Commission will 
develop technology roadmaps  to boost innovation on these critical technologies. These 
technology roadmaps may lead to the launch of new flagship projects taking into account their 
likely impact on the technological sovereignty and leadership of the EU, their sources of 
financing and  their governance.  
In general, the existence or risks of strategic dependencies are more probable in a few 
“sensitive ecosystems”.  Ecosystems such as tourism, textiles and proximity and social economy 
might be unlikely to hold important risks for strateg ic dependencies as a whole. On the other 
hand, dependencies within the aerospace and defence as well as the health ecosystem are more 
likely to be of a strategic nature. In addition, certain dependencies within ecosystems such as 
digital, electronics, rene wable energy and energy intensive industries can also be strategic when 
they impact health or security interests or significantly affect the EU’s ability to achieve the 
green and digital transformation. Furthermore, some ecosystems are also more closely re lated to 
critical areas already listed in the FDI screening Regulation (e.g. aerospace and defence 
ecosystem), the EU’s critical raw materials list (e.g. energy intensive industries ecosystems) as 
well as the critical technologies outlined in the Action Pl an on synergies between civil, defence 
and space industries (e.g. digital and electronics ecosystem). Therefore, the bottom -up mapping 
of dependencies developed in chapter 2 will focus on a number of these more sensitive 
ecosystems (see Graph 1) when considering the question of identifying possible strategic 
dependencies. This also follows the Council conclusions of 16 November 2020, which 
specifically hig hlighted health, defence, space, digital, energy and critical raw materials as 
examples of sensitive industrial ecosystems and areas.28 Nevertheless, this does not exclude the 
                                                           
27 European Commission: Study on the EU's list of Critical Raw Materials,  2020  
28 13004/20 (paragraph 3)  
 
13 
 existence of possible risks or dependencies in other ecosystems not covered by th e analysis in 
this staff working document.29  
Graph 1: More sensitive ecosystems for the purposes of this staff working document  
 
Source: European Commission  
Note: Circles represent a selection of more sensitive ecosystems for the purpose of this staff working document  
1.2 Approach of the staff working document  
The staff working document combines a number of elements to address the objective of 
identifying and addressing strategic dependencies.  
Firstly, Chapter 2 develops a bottom -up (quantitative) analysis of trade dependencies in 
goods , taking as its starting point a detailed assessment of the EU’s trade flows, following a step -
by-step approach:  
- In a first step, the analysis identifies goods where the EU is dependent on a limited 
number of sources, based on the concentration of suppliers, the relative importance of 
extra EU imports as well as their possible substitution with internal EU production;  
- In a second step, the dependencies identified in step 1 are narrowed down to more 
sensitive ecosystems with a higher risk of dependencies being of a possible strategic 
nature (as outlined in chapter 1.1);  
                                                           
29 For example in the agri -food ecosystem, the international dimension is important in the common agricultural 
policy (CA P), as maintaining a healthy balance of imports and exports is key to safeguarding internal market 
stability. There are already tools in place to monitor this ecosystem. Notably, in order to ensure the delivery of the 
CAP objectives, the Commission collect s statistics and produces analyses of agricultural trade and international agri -
food policy developments.  The most up to date information is published monthly in “Monitoring EU agri -food 
trade”, while a more in -depth examination of how the EU agri -food tra de flows have changed in the past year is 
provided in the annual “Monitoring agri -trade policy” report.  

 
14 
 - In a third step, consisting of a qualitative assessment, specific dependencies are identified 
that might be strategic for the EU (in li ne with the different elements set out in chapter 
1.1 concerning the concept of “strategic”) or that require further in -depth analysis to 
assess their impact and strategic nature.  
For each of the identified product dependencies spotted in the more sensiti ve ecosystems the 
analysis also gives an indication of the potential to further diversify the EU’s import sources for 
these products as well as the potential for substitution with EU production (see chapter 2.4).   
This bottom -up analysis faces a number of  data limitations and caveats as to the 
conclusions that can be drawn.  The first relates to the level of aggregation. While the analysis 
covers more than 5,000 traded products or product groups, in some cases the level of detail is not 
sufficient to captur e dependencies on specific or specialised products or inputs.30 Second, 
sufficiently detailed trade statistics are not available for services and trade statistics cannot 
(clearly) identify dependencies in the area of complex technologies including those that are of a 
more emerging nature. Third, the analysis only look s at trade dependencies at one point in time 
and cannot capture changing or emerging trends. In addition, the assessment whether 
dependencies are strategic (step 3) is a qualitative exercise and this staff working document can 
only provide a first indicati on, which needs to be complemented through further dialogue with 
industry on the exact nature and impact of identified dependencies.  
As a consequence, the bottom -up mapping cannot be considered to be an exhaustive 
screening of all possible product depende ncies.  In addition, it needs to be complemented by 
discussions with industry and Member States on the strategic nature of the identified 
dependencies taking into account the specific ecosystems concerned. Despite these limitations, 
the analysis offers a me thodical screening giving preliminary insights into individual products 
and inputs where the EU has a higher level of dependence on third countries including some with 
a possible strategic character. This analysis is dynamic by nature and requires regular updating 
and refinement, given the changing nature of dependencies. Further details on the approach and 
methodology of the bottom -up mapping are set out in chapter 2.  
Secondly, the Industry Strategy of March 2020 highlighted the importance of developing key 
enabling technologies that are strategically important for Europe’s industrial future. In addition, 
the recent Communication  on the Digital Decade underlined that digital technologies are 
currently mostly developed outside of Europe and highlighted the  importance of reinforcing 
internal strengths and capacities for the EU to achieve digital leadership. The EU’s performance 
in comparison with its global competitors in the area of these key technologies cannot be clearly 
captured by an analysis of trade s tatistics as performed in chapter 2. In this context, chapter 3 
aims to complement the assessment done in chapter 2 by considering the EU’s position in 
comparison with its global competitors in the area of key technologies that will drive future 
competitiv eness . It does this on the basis of  a range of indicators  (considering e.g. research, 
                                                           
30 In addition, the bottom -up product mapping faces a number of specific limitations when it comes to identifying 
dependencies within the defence and ae rospace ecosystem, linked to the sensitivity of data associated to defence 
goods, as well as the classification level of most defence contracts. Further work is needed to assess this specific 
area in detail.  
 
15 
 investments, innovation and business dynamics), looking into the EU’s relative performance in 
comparison with its global competitors. These provide important indications,  albeit not complete, 
as to possible risks of potential (future) dependencies in the area of such technologies. For 
example, comparatively low levels of innovation and investments may result in Europe 
becoming more dependent on other countries for access t o state -of-the-art technologies. Chapter 
3 relies on information obtained from different sources, including the Advanced Technologies for 
Industry project as well as other data and analyses on the EU’s performance in research and 
innovation.  
Thirdly, chap ter 4 provides indications of relevant possible measures that might be able to 
mitigate strategic dependencies and related risks.  Such measures would need to build on in -
depth discussion and dialogue with and between Member States and industry. They should  build 
on the opportunities of international trade to diversify and strengthen sources of supply as well 
as, where needed, the strengths of the Single Market to build up adequate EU capacity. Measures 
would need to be carefully examined with a view to main tain the competitiveness of the EU, 
choosing to address dependencies and increase resilience in the most cost -efficient manner.  
Finally, for those specifically identified dependencies of strategic importance, possible policy 
intervention would need to buil d on a thorough understanding and detailed analysis of the 
functioning of relevant value chains as well as the underlying drivers of Europe’s current and 
possible future strategic dependencies. Chapter 5 presents a selected number of in -depth 
reviews of po ssible dependencies identified in chapters 2 and 3 that can be considered 
strategic across a number of key areas (including health, digital, green).  These reviews 
provide an overview of the origin of strategic dependencies, their impact on the EU economy a s 
well as possible relevant (ongoing) measures. They provide a first stage of assessments in 
strategic areas and should not be considered to be an exhaustive analysis of all the EU’s strategic 
dependencies. Further key areas, including products, services o r technologies key to the twin 
transition such as renewables or energy storage,  might be considered in the future.        
  
 
16 
 2. Mapping of EU dependencies in the most sensitive ecosystems  
The COVID -19 crisis showed the importance of obtaining a more comprehensive 
understanding of the EU’s strategic dependencies as a first step to strengthening resilience.  
This chapter provides a bottom -up mapping of the EU’s ecosystems and their reliance on 
international trade. It covers trade flows for some 5,000 pro ducts classifying goods as dependent 
based on various meaningful and objective economic criteria. While this assessment faces a 
number of data limitations and caveats, it provides a first indication of goods (final products and 
inputs) where the EU might h ave a higher level of dependence on a limited number of suppliers, 
including those with a possible strategic character in more sensitive ecosystems.  
2.1 Context  
Over the last decades, production processes and supply chains have become increasingly 
interlinked  across countries and continents. The drivers explaining the continuous integration 
of Global Value Chains (GVCs) include, among others, cost reduction, greater market openness 
(lower tariff and non -tariff barriers), changes in the political environment, a s well as multiple 
technological innovations. GVCs enable firms to improve their market position through 
delocalisation strategies and generate benefits from a more efficient production process 
(including in some cases lower prices for final consumers) and  help firms to reduce risks. In 
addition, when firms become geographically closer to their final customers, they may also gain 
from a better consumer knowledge.  
While global value chains are highly efficient from a cost, growth, and a diversification 
perspective,31 they could also entail vulnerabilities to external demand and supply shocks. 
Reliance of EU firms on international trade is a strength for the resilience of the EU economy 
and it is fundamental to safeguard the wealth and competitiveness of the E U through efficiency 
and productivity gains, as well as to sustain demand for EU output.  In that regard, private firms 
have the ability, the incentive and the information to diversify supply and demand sources 
sufficiently to absorb normal discontinuities in trade flows. However, not all of them might be 
able to accommodate unanticipated demand and/or supply shocks exceeding by far what normal 
business operations would dictate. In such instances, the collective cost of a potential demand 
and supply shock to  the general EU public may exceed the lost profits to the market operator 
importing specific goods or services. Given the result, akin to a market failure, policy action 
addressing strategic dependencies may be justified.  
While the majority of value chains  have shown resilience during the pandemic, the crisis 
has shown that disruptions in GVCs might affect specific products, some of which are 
particularly critical for society.  For instance, the greatest disruptions have been felt in medical 
(e.g. personal p rotective equipment) and medical -pharmaceutical supplies . These products have 
been under severe strain due to the enormous surge in demand compared to supply.32 Export 
                                                           
31 OECD: Shocks, risks and global value chains: i nsights from the OECD METRO model, 2020  
32 See OECD: Global Value Chains: Efficiency and Risks in the Context of COVID -19, 2020; S. Evenett: Chinese 
whispers: COVID -19, global supply chains in essential goods, and public policy, 2020 (Journal of Internation al 
 
 
17 
 restrictions imposed by some countries on these specific products or their components hav e 
worsened the situation. At the same time, other measures adopted by governments cut import 
duties, facilitated customs -clearance and streamlined approval requirements for medical 
supplies33. 
While observing significant differences across sectors, overall,  the EU is an important 
supplier and customer for extra EU countries. Using GVC data, national and international 
links between sectors along value chains can be tracked, by looking for each sector at both 
upstream links (which shape supply chains) and down stream links (which contribute to final 
demand). Graph 2 shows the exposure of EU industry to extra EU markets both in terms of 
demand and supply, which are then used in the production process of each sector. It shows t hat 
the sectors with the highest upstream and downstream foreign links are Computer & electronics , 
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals , Basic Metals  and Electrical equipment . Sectors above the 45 
degree line rely more on extra EU demand than on the supply from e xtra EU countries.  
With few exceptions, extra EU demand is relatively more important for the EU aggregate 
than extra EU supply . However, foreign supply from certain sectors still plays a significant role 
for EU production. Graph 3 ranks sectors according to the extent to which EU production 
depends on foreign supply. The EU relies on extra EU countries particularly in raw materials and 
electronics, but also textiles, financial activities, as well as chemicals and active  pharmaceutical 
ingredients. Consequently, this highlights the need for the EU to continue being integrated in the 
global economy.  
EU trade diversification is high and stable over time. At a macro  level, extra -EU trade is 
diversified. Both extra -EU exports  and extra -EU imports concentration have not varied much in 
the last decade (see Graph 4). Compared to other countries, while extra -EU import concentrati on 
has remained broadly constant over the last two decades, concentration decreased significantly in 
China and increased in the US. For example, US imports at an aggregate level are currently 
around twice as concentrated as EU imports.  
Macro and sectoral t rade give an overview of dependencies, but a more granular detail is 
required to identify specific products where the EU has strong external dependencies.34 
Ideally, the identification of dependent products would use product information at a 8 -10 digit 
level on the Harmonised Standardisation (HS) system or firm level data. However, comparable 
data sources across all countries in the world are not available. T his would jeopardise the 
calculation of the dependency indicators proposed in this chapter and their comparison across 
countries.  Thus, a 6 -digit level of disaggregation is used, which already provides informative 
results of the level of dependency across products.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Business Policy); OECD: COVID -19 and global value chains: Policy options to build more resilient production 
networks, 2020  
33 In this respect see , for example,  European Commission  Decisio n 2020/491  and European Commission Notice 
2020/C 96/I/01 . 
34 To be noted is that trade in services is not captured in the database used for this analysis.   
 
18 
 The following section outlines a methodology to identify existing dependencies of the EU, 
including dependencies of a possible strategic nature in more sensitive ecosystems. This exercise 
has certain limits dictated by the information sources ava ilable as already outlined in Chapter 
1.2.  
Graph 2: Downstream and upstream exposure to extra EU markets  
 
Source: Commission elaborations based on OECD 2016 -AMNE data. Note: on the horizontal axis, the indicator measures for 
each EU sector the share of value added that depends on intermediate inputs generated by extra EU supply chains; on the verti cal 
axis the indicator measures for each EU sector the share of final demand absorbed by exports to extra EU countries. These fig ures 
are based on the most recent available data (2016). As the share of value added has stayed rather stable over time, more rece nt 
figures are not expected to substantially depart from this illustration.  
 
Graph 3: Foreign (extra E U) dependency for EU production  
 
Source: Commission elaborations based on OECD -AMNE 2016 data. This graph shows the share of value added embedded in 
the production process that comes from non -EU countries for 20 sectors in decreasing order. Note that th is level of aggregation is 
not suited to identify dependencies in some sectors/ecosystems such as defence and aerospace.  
 

 
19 
 Graph 4: Foreign (extra EU) trade is very diversified and has remained stable over time  
  
Source: Felbermayr presentation to Informal Meeting of Trade Ministers Berlin, Sept. 21, 2020 “Fostering the Resilience of EU  
Trade Links”.  
Data source: BACI (CEPII). The Herfindahl index takes a value of 100 if trade is fully concentrated on 1 foreign co untry,  
2.2 Methodology to identify foreign dependencies  
The bottom -up mapping of foreign dependencies relies on an agnostic, data -driven 
perspective with the objective of identifying products with extra EU dependency . The 
bottom -up mapping follows a step -by step approach. In a first step, the analysis identifies traded 
products where the EU is more dependent on third countries based on three economic indicators. 
Then, the identified dependencies are narrowed down to t he most sensitive ecosystems. On this 
basis, a further qualitative assessment consists in spotting dependencies in the most sensitive 
ecosystems, with a possible  strategic nature (in line with definition of “strategic” outlined in 
Chapter 1.1).  
Graph 5: Approach bottom -up analysis  
 
Source: European Commission  
2.2.1 Core Dependency Indicators  
The bottom -up approach classifies products as highly foreign dependent if the levels of 
import diversification and potential substitutability with EU supply are low.  This mapping 
of dependencies builds on the approach used by Bonneau and Nakaa (2020), but it extends th eir 

 
20 
 analysis by considering potential substitutability with EU production.35 Data covering the 
universe of country trade in goods is used, including more than 5,000 products defined at the six -
digit level using the international nomenclature of the Harmoniz ed System (HS6),36 across all 
industrial ecosystems.37 Given that the level of dependency cannot be characterised by a single 
metric, the bottom -up approach combines three complementary economic indicators that are 
referred to as the core dependency indicato rs (CDIs) as presented in Graph 6 .    
Graph 6: Core Dependency Indicators  
 
Source: European Commission  
 
1. Concentration of EU imports from extra EU sources : The first indicator aims at 
quantifying the concentration of EU imports with respect to the rest of the world, in order 
to capture the risk of disruptions faced by the EU due to low diversification of extra EU 
sources. In particular, this indicator identifies products for which EU imports (in values) 
are highly concentrated in a few extra EU countries. To this end, the Herfindahl -
Hirschman Index (HHI) index is used, computed as detailed below:  
𝐶𝐷𝐼 1=∑(𝑠𝑖2)𝑛
𝑖=1 
where  𝑠𝑖 is the market share of the extra EU supplying country i in EU’s imports, and n is 
the total number of extra EU supplying countries.  
                                                           
35 See Bonneau and Nakaa: Vulnérabilité des approvisionnements français et européens , 2020  and other recent 
studies that have analysed the foreign dependencies b y looking at the diversification of EU imports from non -EU 
sources (e.g. G. Felbermayr: Fostering the Resilience of EU Trade Links , 2020 and Cernat and Guinea: On ants, 
dinosaurs, and how to survive a trade apocalypse , 2020)  
36 The first two digits (HS -2) identify the chapter the goods are classified in, the next two digits (HS -4) identify 
groupings within that chapter. The next two digits (HS -6) are even more specific. Up to the HS -6 digit level, all  
countries classify products in the same way. While HS -6 classification is already highly disaggregated and suitable 
for analysing dependencies across ecosystems, for some specific products, an analysis at a higher level of 
disaggregation would be necessary to complement this assessment.  
37 The notion of ecosystems captures the complex set of interlinkages and interdependencies among sectors and 
firms spreading across countries in the Single Market. This concept takes into account specificities of business 
models, presence of vulnerable players (SMEs and m icro) and interdependencies.   

 
21 
 2. Importance of extra EU imports in total demand: The second indicator measures the 
importance of extra EU imports in tot al EU imports (i.e. extra and intra EU imports), so 
as to identify the products for which the EU mainly relies on foreign sources. It is 
computed as the share of extra EU imports in total EU imports (in values):  
𝐶𝐷𝐼 2= 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 
 
3. Substitutability of extra EU imports with EU production: The third indicator aims at 
capturing whether the EU production can cover the extra EU import needs in the event of 
trade disruptions. For this purpose, EU total exports, including intra and extra EU 
exports, are used as a proxy for the EU internal production capacity.38  For each product, 
the ratio between the extra EU import value and the total EU export value (i.e. extra and 
intra EU exports) is computed  as detailed below:  
𝐶𝐷𝐼 3=𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝐸𝑈
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝐸𝑈 
2.2.2 Identifying foreign dependencies  
The narrowing down of foreign dependencies is based on the application of thresholds on 
the three indicators.  As depicted in Graph 5 , the whole sample of around 5000 products is 
considered, with the objective of narrowing the number of products down to most dep endent 
goods, satisfying the following thresholds for each indicator:  
i. 𝐶𝐷𝐼 1=∑ (𝑠𝑖2)𝑛
𝑖=1 >0.4  
 
The indicator suggests that the higher the concentration, the lower the diversification of 
EU imports from extra EU sources. Consequently, this threshold implies that the EU 
import value originates mainly from 2.5 foreign countries.39 It is important to 
acknowledge that the diversification of imports could be complemented with additional 
information on the trading partner in question, so as to assess the ove rall level of risk.   
 
ii. 𝐶𝐷𝐼 2= 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒  
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒>0.5 
                                                           
38 Ideally, production data should be used for the purpose of this indicator but European production data do not 
allow to analyse dependencies at 6 -digit level. Databases like PRODCOM contains many missing values at this level 
of product disaggregation.   
39 This threshold is more conservative than 0.25, which is considered by the economic literature as an indication of a 
high concentration.  
 
22 
 The indicator suggests that the higher the share, the higher the importance of extra EU 
imports in total EU imports. Hence, this threshold i mplies that the value of extra EU 
imports accounts for the majority (> 50%) of the value of total EU imports.  
iii. 𝐶𝐷𝐼 3=𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎  𝐸𝑈 𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝐸𝑈
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝐸𝑈 >1 
 
The indicator suggests that the higher the ratio, the less able the EU is to substitute extra 
EU imports with EU production in case of a trade disruption. Therefore, this threshold 
implies that the value of extra EU imports is higher than the value of tota l EU exports.  
A sensitivity analysis is conducted, based on the whole distribution of the three indicators. More 
precisely, all 5000 products are ranked based on each indicator. The ranks of these three 
indicators are combined in a composite indicator mea suring the overall foreign dependency of 
each product. Broadly, the results of the approach based on thresholds corresponds to the most 
dependent products based on a composite indicator.  
Graph 7: Identification of dependencies on extra EU supplies  
 
Source: European Commission  
2.3 Results  
As highlighted in chapter 2.2, the bottom -up mapping consists in the application of three 
economic indicators and their respective thresholds to the whole sample of about 5,000 
products to identify foreign dependencies ( Graph 7 ). The mapping exercise first identifies 
around 390 dependent products across all ecosystems. In a second step, the  list of products 
identified as dependent is narrowed down to the most sensitive ecosystems. Finally, in the third 
step, only the most dependent products in the most sensitive ecosystems are considered.  

 
23 
 The bottom -up mapping identifies 137 products in the  most sensitive ecosystems where the 
EU can be considered highly dependent on imports from third countries. These pre -
identified products represent about 6% of the EU’s total import value of goods.  
The three main foreign sources of EU import value for the  137 products identified as highly 
dependent are China, Vietnam and Brazil ( Graph 8 ). China represents around 52% of the 
total value of imports of the most foreign dependent products and it is among the top three 
suppliers for around 54% of these goods. In terms of stages of processing, around 16% of the 
most foreign dependent products are  raw materials, around 57% are intermediate goods and 
around 27% final goods. At the same time, the EU can also be a source of dependency for other 
countries (see Box 4 for an example of reverse dependencies of the EU and US and their 
common dependencies v is-à-vis important trading partners).  
Graph 8: Share of EU imports value of dependent products  
 
Source: European Commission based on BACI database  
The strategic nature of these identified dependencies needs to be assessed on a c ase-by-case 
basis, relying on in -depth discussions with Member States and relevant industries. Further 
discussions with Member States and relevant industries would be needed to assess the possible 
strategic character of these dependencies, as well as their  impact and the risks that they entail on 
the functioning of the more sensitive ecosystems (including e.g. taking into account risks linked 
to the specific  trading partners in question). In what follows, a preliminary description of the 
dependencies identi fied in the more sensitive ecosystems as well as a number of considerations 
on the possible strategic nature of the identified dependencies is provided.  
A large group of identified dependencies are raw and processed materials and chemicals 
that can be classified in the energy intensive ecosystem  but that have also wider importance 
and implications across several other ecosystems.  The bottom -up mapping exercise highlights 
foreign dependencies for 99 products related to raw/processed materials and chemicals (e.g. 
beryllium, cobalt, antimony, lithium, aluminium, tungstates, chromium, nickel, molybdenum, 

 
24 
 manganese, ferro -alloys, steel ,40 various chemical products). Several of these identified raw 
materials have already been assessed as critical in the context of the EU’s regular monitoring of 
critical raw materials.41 The mapping also highlights dependencies regarding imported energy 
products (e.g. petroleum products and fossil fuels), which are important to consider in the 
context of the decarbonisation of EU industry. Chapter 5 of this staff working document provides 
more in -depth reviews of the EU’s dependencies and possible vulnerabil ities in the areas of raw 
materials as well as hydrogen as a key contributor to the EU’s future decarbonised economy.42  
A second important group of dependencies belongs to the health ecosystem , including active 
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), other medi cines and COVID -19 related goods in the 
health ecosystem.  Access to medical products and pharmaceuticals is crucial for the health of 
Europeans and the EU’s open strategic autonomy, as evidenced by the COVID -19 crisis. The 
bottom -up mapping identifies 14 p roducts as foreign dependent, some of which have been of 
high relevance during the COVID -19 crisis (e.g. part of protective garments). Others include 
chemical substances known as APIs (i.e. antibiotics, vitamins, hormones, heterocyclic 
compounds), which ar e particularly important in the manufacturing of medicines. The mapping 
indicates for a range of APIs that they are concentrated in a few sourcing countries, with little 
potential for substitution with domestic production as the EU produces different produ cts 
compared to the ones imported. In this regard, given that APIs are potentially essential inputs for 
producing a wide range of medicines, Chapter 5 of this staff working document provides a more 
in-depth review of the EU’s potential strategic dependenci es in the area of APIs.  
An important number of dependent products are also identified in the renewables, digital 
and electronics ecosystems  as they  are directly related to the green and digital transition.  
The bottom -up analysis notably reveals that that t he EU has a high level of foreign dependency 
with respect to 17 products related to renewable energy production, green mobility and 
digital/electronics (e.g. permanent magnets, electric accumulators, electric motors, radio 
broadcast receivers, laptops, mob ile phones).  
The production of many green and digital products relies on various (critical) raw 
materials.  As highlighted above, several of these raw materials are identified by the bottom -up 
mapping as dependent (e.g. lithium, cobalt, nickel, copper, chr omium, molybdenum). For 
example, the production of permanent magnets, which are used in different types of wind 
turbines, is reliant on various raw materials. The bottom -up mapping indicates that not only the 
relevant raw materials but also the permanent m agnets themselves are foreign dependent goods. 
As for green mobility, the dependent electric accumulators might use raw materials on which the 
EU is foreign dependent as well. More broadly, in the renewable ecosystem, several 
                                                           
40 Steel is a vital component in most of the EU’s industrial ecosystems. For this reason,  the Staff Working Document 
“Towards competitive and clean European steel” shows different policies that the EU already has at its disposal to 
help the steel industry in its transformation – from research funding, through regulatory measures to trade 
instruments.  
41 See European Commission: Critical Raw Materials for Strategic Technologies and Sectors in the EU - A Foresight 
Study, 2020  
42 This is in line with the objectives of the European energy union, which aims at creating a reliable, affordable and 
susta inable energy system.  
 
25 
 dependencies may have an impac t on the decarbonisation and continued proper functioning of 
the EU electricity system.43 For example, several hydrogen related technologies depend on 
imports of raw materials for key components such as electrolysers and fuel cells. In the area of 
digital, for example, some of the identified dependent raw materials are used in the production of 
semi -conductors, the basic building blocks of all digital products and services. Chapter 5 of this 
staff working document provides more in -depth reviews concerning Li -ion batteries and 
hydrogen technologies.  
The bottom -up product mapping faces a number of limitations when it comes to identifying 
dependencies within the defence and aerospace ecosystem  and can only provide tentative 
insights.  Identifying foreign dependen t products within this ecosystem through a bottom -up 
mapping faces a number of challenges given the lack of complete data (notably for 
confidentiality reasons) and the required level of detail. For these reasons, in this ecosystem in 
particular, the bottom -up methodology relying on trade data should be complemented with other 
more qualitative, ecosystem -specific assessments (at a more granular level). This specific 
assessment will be tackled through the EU Observatory on Critical Technologies for civil, 
defence and space industries.  
Box 4 – Reverse and common dependencies in products  
The main trading partners of the EU (notably the US and China) are also conducting 
comprehensive reviews of the resilience of their own strategic supply chains. The US issued 
an Executive Order on America’s Supply Chains44 with the goal of strengthening supply chain 
resilience and security, building capacity and diversifying sources. Concerning China, a review 
of strategic supply chains is part of the Chinese 5 -year plan (5YP) which, among other 
objectives, aims at minimising external dependencies.  
Given the current global environment, this box intends to shed light on the foreign 
dependencies in goods that the EU and the US have with each other, as well as their 
common dependencies vis -à-vis the rest of the world and China specifically (being the main 
source of dependencies for both the EU and the US). As a starting point, the analysis 
identifies the general foreign dependencies in goods of the EU and the US based on two out of 
the three the economic indicators detailed in Section 2.2.1. More precisely, in this context, a high 
level of foreign dependency is associated with a low diversification of import sources (i.e. high 
concentration) and a limited domestic capac ity (i.e. low substitutability of imports with domestic 
                                                           
43 A dedicated study for the Commission (forthcoming, May 2021) assesses the resilience of the critical supply 
chains for energy security and clean energy transition during and after the COVID -19 crisis. It assesses 
dependencies and cr iticalities related to different key areas such as the cables, conductors and equipment needed to 
transport and distribute electricity, the production of renewable energy sources (especially wind and solar energy), 
the storage of electricity and smart grid  technologies required for operating the electricity system.  
44 President Biden signed on 24 February an Executive Order on A merica’s Supply Chains  launching a 
comprehensive review of US supply chains for semiconductors, high -capacity batteries, pharmaceuticals and 
medical supplies and strategic and critical minerals that will identify ways to secure supply chains against risks and 
vulnerabilities.  This review should be completed in 100 days (i.e. by early June).   There will also be an in -depth 
one-year review of six industrial bases covering defence, public health and biological preparedness, ICT, 
transportation, energy, and agr icultural commodities and food production.   
 
26 
 production) as defined above.45 Then, relying on the identified general foreign dependencies, the 
analysis identifies those products where the US is highly dependent on the EU (“reverse 
dependencies”) and vice -versa. Furthermore, “common dependencies” that the EU and the US 
share vis -à-vis China and the world can also be identified. These identified reverse and common 
dependencies are then further assessed by evaluating their potential for diversificati on using the 
existing global trade networks as a proxy.46  
Overview of EU & US dependencies in sensitive ecosystems  
 
Note: This table focuses on potentially sensitive ecosystems; The chart shows products where the US can be considered 
dependent on the EU  (first row); the EU dependent on the US (second row); common dependencies for the EU and the US on 
China (third row); and common dependencies for the EU and the US on the world (fourth row)  
Source: Commission analysis based on BACI database  
The EU is les s dependent on the US than vice -versa and both countries have important 
dependencies vis -à-vis China.  The US appears more dependent on imported products from 
the EU than vice -versa. This is in line with the aggregate finding that the US has more 
concentrat ed sources of imports compared to the EU (see Graph 4). In addition, the EU and the 
US have an important amount of common dependencies vis -à-vis China. Furthermore, for 
many of these common EU/US dependencies vis -à-vis China, the potential for trade 
divers ification to other countries (beyond China) appears limited given the current structure of 
world trade where China takes up a very central position for these dependent products.  
These common dependencies of the EU and the US on China include various goods  in 
sensitive ecosystems.  Notable examples include products in the Health ecosystem (e.g. 
various Covid -related goods and APIs including vitamins, antibiotics, hormones) and goods 
                                                           
45 The indicator corresponding to the importance of extra EU imports in total demand is not used in this analysis, as 
it is specific to the EU context and cannot be mirrored within the US.  
46 To measure the potenti al of diversification of different products, an indicator measuring the risk of centrality is 
used (IMF Working Paper No. 17/30), which identifies situations where an exporter is central to a large number of 
countries in a trade network. The classification  of the potential for diversification across four categories is done 
based on the quartiles of the distribution of the indicator taking into account more than 5000 products.  

 
27 
 belonging to the ecosystems relevant for the EU’s twin transition (e.g. perm anent magnets, 
electric accumulators, cell phones, radio broadcast receivers). Similarly as for the bottom -up 
mapping carried out in chapter 2 of this staff working document, these analytical findings 
would need to be further corroborated with qualitative analysis and discussion with Member 
States and industry.   
Common and reverse dependencies (EU & US) in sensitive ecosystems: examples at 
product level  
 
Note: chart shows examples of products in sensitive ecosystems where the US can be considered dependent on the EU (first 
row); the EU dependent on the US (second row); common dependencies for the EU and the US on China (third row); and 
common dependencies for the EU and the US on the world (fourth row). These examples might not be representative of  the 
overall level of dependency.  
Source: European Commission based on BACI database.  
 
 
2.4 Assessing the further vulnerability of dependent products: potential for diversification 
and substitution  
Out of the 137 products identified as dependencies in the sensitive ecosystems, a lower 
number could be considered as possibly more vulnerable given that their potential for 
diversification is low. To evaluate the diversification potential, a measure for c oncentration of 
world exports is used.47 Thus, the HHI index computed at the world level for each product (based 
on the total export flows of each third country) captures the concentration of production in the 
world outside the EU.48 A high level of concentr ation of world exports of a given product could 
indicate that the EU has limited potential for further diversification of imports (e.g. in case of an 
unexpected trade disruption).  
                                                           
47 Alternatively, a network centrality indicator could be used to identify products  where there are a few central 
players in the world, which takes into account the whole structure of the trade network.  
48 The indicator used to measure the potential for further diversification is again the HHI index considering the 
exports of every count ry in the world excluding the EU countries.  

 
28 
 For about half of the identified dependent products world export values out side the EU are 
concentrated in 2 -3 countries. To identify products with low potential of diversification, a 
threshold of 0.4 for the HHI index is used (i.e. world export value outside the EU being 
concentrated in 2 -3 countries). It is important to acknowl edge that the diversification capacity 
could be complemented with a risk analysis of the trading partner in question so as to assess the 
overall level of vulnerability. About 50% of the 137 products previously identified as dependent, 
have an index higher than 0.4, representing around 4.5% of total imports. These products could 
be considered possibly more vulnerable as the potential for diversification is low.  
To evaluate the potential for substitution of imports with domestic production across the 
depende nt products, the average price of exports is compared with the average price of 
imports. The underlying idea is that the higher the price differences, either positive or negative, 
the more difficult it is to substitute foreign goods with domestic goods eve n if internal capacity is 
available.  
Another layer of possible vulnerability is a price difference between extra -EU imports and 
total EU exports of at least 30%. The distribution of price differences between extra -EU 
imports and total EU exports shows that  the median price difference is 30%. This suggests that 
for half of all identified dependent products, the goods produced within the EU are significantly 
different compared to the ones imported from third countries, representing around 1.2% of total 
import  value. While the analysis cannot point to specific reasons behind these price differences 
(e.g. quality differentiation, efficiency or other), the fact that the goods produced are different 
from the ones imported reveals another layer of possible vulnerab ility for this half of the 
identified dependent products.  
Together, a low potential of diversification and high price differences between extra -EU 
imports and total EU exports might point to a subset of 34 particularly vulnerable 
products.  This subset of 34 goods has an HHI higher than 0.4 (i.e. possibly low potential for 
diversification) and a price difference of at least 30% (i.e. possibly low potential for 
substitution). This final subset represents 0.6% of total import value. Among the 34 products 
identified, 22 products are classified as raw materials and intermediates goods (e.g. some APIs 
including alkaloids or heterocyclic compounds and some ferro -alloys including ferro -tungsten 
and ferro -niobium)  and 12 as final goods (e.g. Turbo -propellers, COVID -19 related products 
such as part of protective garments, types of radio -broadcast receivers and some types of 
medicines).   
2.5 Single Market dependencies linked to concentration of economy activity  
The Single Market per definition relies on an open exchange of goods and services between 
Member States. The Single Market is key for the economic resilience of the EU as a whole, 
since Member States can rely on the capabilities and strengths of each other . One of the main 
advantages of the Single Market is the possibility of enabling economies of scale, through 
specialisation, with notable benefits for the overall economy, i.e. contributing to the overall 
economy growth, creating jobs and adding value to c onsumers.  
 
29 
 Still, it is important to consider that activity concentration in firms within the Single 
Market brings about various risks.  As highlighted in Chapter 1.1, risks related to internal 
dependencies, arising from an important concentration of activi ty, are of a different nature 
compared to external dependencies. Possible internal dependencies might emerge when the EU 
relies on the provision of key products and inputs originating from a relatively limited number of 
sources within the Single Market. Fo r instance, a natural disaster affecting activities concentrated 
in one or a few firms could affect the well -functioning of EU value chains within the Single 
Market. Relying on very few firms within the Single Market for supply of specific goods can 
also l ead to reduced capacity to respond to demand surges.  
Identifying risks across firms originating from production concentration within the Single 
Market requires detailed and comprehensive information . Such analysis should be based on 
data including the loca tion of production facilities at a very granular product level. This data 
would allow to explore whether there are important levels of economic concentration at a 
product level, which can create risks for the EU as a whole in case of an unexpected shock. 
Currently, such granular data on production locations at a very detailed product level is not 
available across the EU. Further work would be needed (e.g. in the form of ad -hoc surveys, case 
studies, use of existing national firm level databases) to collect information on firm production 
facilities at a product level across Member States.  
A smooth functioning of the Single Market is a key asset to ensure the resilience of the EU 
economy and mitigate risks of possible internal dependencies. The COVID -19 pande mic has 
shown that a well -functioning Single Market should be at the core of the Union’s assets to tackle 
future potential crises. Structural solutions are needed to safeguard free movement during crisis 
times. This is particularly important where concentr ation of activities within the Single Market 
may exist. Furthermore, competition policy can also play a major role in addressing possible 
risks related to such internal dependencies, by diversifying sources of supply, promoting 
innovation and fostering an open competitive industrial fabric that prevents overreliance on a 
few players or products, be it within or outside the Single Market.  
 
 
 
  
 
30 
 3. EU performance in key technologies and research & innovation  
Strengthening the EU’s capacity to develop and take up technologies that are important for 
the industrial future of the EU is of key importance to enhance future competitiveness and 
avoid possible (future) strategic dependencies. The Industry strategy of March 2020 
specifically highlighted that the EU should support the development of key enabling 
technologies that are strategically important for Europe’s industrial future. The Communication 
on the Digital Decade underlined the importance of reinforcing in ternal strengths and capacities 
in the area of digital technologies in order for the EU to be a stronger international partner.  
This chapter aims to complement the assessment done in chapter 2 by considering the EU’s 
position in comparison with its global competitors in the area of key technologies that will 
drive future competitiveness . The EU’s performance in comparison with its global competitors 
in the area of these technologies cannot be clearly captured by an analysis of trade statistics as 
performed in chapter 2. In this context, this chapter assesses the EU’s relative position in the area 
of key technologies  on the basis of  a range of indicators  (considering e.g. research, investments, 
innovation and business dynamics) . These provide important indica tions (or early warnings)  as 
to possible risks of (future) dependencies in the area of such technologies. For example, 
comparatively low levels of research, innovation, investments and entrepreneurial activities are 
key drivers of Europe becoming potential ly more dependent on other countries for access to 
state-of-the-art technologies.  
The analytical basis for this chapter consists of a number of different quantitative and 
qualitative sources. It first considers the EU’s position in the development and upt ake of certain 
key technologies, based on information developed through the Advanced Technologies for 
Industry project49. This provides an indicative overview of the EU’s performance in key 
technologies compared to its global competitors, using indicators a nd proxies of technology 
generation, entrepreneurial activities, investments and available skills. In addition, as regards 
green technologies, information is used from the Commission report on progress of clean energy 
competitiveness. Secondly, the EU’s pe rformance in research and innovation (R&I) is a key 
driver of technological performance. For this, the analysis mainly relies on available Eurostat 
statistics on R&I and the 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard50.   
3.1 Key technologies for (future) competitiveness  
Technologies that will drive the EU’s future competitiveness include both those that are already 
at a more mature stage of development as well as emerging and breakthrough technologies that 
will gain importance in a more long -term perspecti ve.  
 
 
                                                           
49 https://ati.ec.europa.eu/   
50 European Commission (JRC/DG R&I): 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard. The Scoreboard is 
based on companies’ published annual rep orts and accounts.  
 
31 
 Key technologies (based on  Advanced Technologies for Industry project)  
In the context of extensive monitoring of technological trends in the area of key enabling 
technologies for industry, a number of technologies have been identified as being of 
strategic importance for the EU’s industrial future.51 These key technologies are expected to 
substantially alter the business and social environment. The focus of this section will be on 
technologies that are part of the Advanced Technologies for Industry pr oject , including 
Advanced materials, Advanced manufacturing, Artificial Intelligence, Big data, Cloud, Industrial 
biotechnology, the Internet of Things, Micro -and nanoelectronics (including semi -conductors), 
IT for Mobility, Nanotechnology, Photonics, Robo tics and Cybersecurity.52 These technologies 
are also part of the list of critical technologies highlighted in the Action plan on synergies 
between civil, defence and space industries. Several are also closely linked to the six key 
strategic value chains id entified in the Strategic Forum on Important Projects of Common 
European Interest.53   
Graph 9: Indicator of overall EU performance in key technologies  
 
Source: Advanced Technologies for Industry project  
Note: The graphs provides a ranking of performance in key technologies in terms of technology generation, start -up creation 
and skills comparing EU with US, China and Japan54 
The EU has both strengths and possible weaknesses across these technologies. An overall 
assessment  – based on a number of elements including technological generation and uptake, 
                                                           
51 Notably in the context of the Key Enabling Technologies Observatory and the Digital Transformation Monitor – 
now centralised in the ongoing Advanced Technologies for Industry (ATI) project. The list of identified 
technologies also take s into account the findings of the high -level strategy group on industrial technologies.  
52 Definitions for these technologies are available at https://ati.ec.europa.eu/repor ts/eu -reports/technology -definitions   
53 The Strategic Forum on Important Projects of Common European Interest identified six key strategic value chains 
in Europe where further joint and coordinated efforts are needed. These six identified value chains are connected, 
clean and autonomous vehicles; smart health; low -CO2 emission industry; hydrogen technologies and systems; 
industrial internet of things; and cybersecurity.  
54 Detailed methodology available at https://ati.ec.europa.eu/reports/eu -reports/advanced -technologies -industry -
methodological -report   

 
32 
 entrepreneurial activities and  available skills – shows that the EU has a relatively strong position 
for some technologies ( Graph 9). For e xample, the EU currently maintains sound technological 
leadership in Advanced Manufacturing, with European firms delivering a wide range of advance 
manufacturing equipment that are key enablers to production lines across the world. The EU also 
shows some s trengths for related technologies such as in the area of Advanced materials. At the 
same time, some indicators appear to suggest that the EU faces certain challenges in comparison 
with its global competitors for several other technologies including AI, Big  Data, cloud, 
cybersecurity, industrial biotech, robotics and micro -electronics (including semi -conductors).55  
Looking in more detail at technology generation confirms important differences in 
performance across technologies. In some areas, the EU holds the highest share of worldwide 
patent applications (e.g. advanced manufacturing technologies, Internet of Things and in the area 
of IT for mobility56) showing strengths in technology generation ( Graph 10). Such strong 
performance in technology generation has a positive impact on business performance. In fact, 
European firms that own intellectual property rights (IPRs) have on average 20% higher revenue 
per employee than firms that do not.57 The impact is even higher for SM Es, among which the 
revenue per employee is 68% higher for SMEs that own IPRs.  
Graph 10: Share in world transnational advanced technology patent applications  
 
Source: Advanced Technologies for Industry project  
Note: Based on EPO Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT, 2017)  
At the other side of the spectrum, the EU has been gradually losing leadership in many 
technologies in terms of its share in worldwide patent applications. This is largely due to the 
rise in Chines e patents but also patent activity in Taiwan and South Korea. Currently, the EU is 
lagging behind both China and the US in a number of the areas. This is the case for AI and Big 
Data, although the EU is showing some increasing dynamics in AI -related patent ing. The EU 
                                                           
55 IDC, Technopolis Group, Capgemini, Fraunhofer, IDEA Consult and NESTA: Advanced Technologies fo r 
Industry – General Findings, 2020  
56 IT for mobility covers e.g. satellite navigation and radiolocation, which are core technologies in the area of 
autonomous driving  
57 EUIPO, EPO: Intellectual property rights and firm performance in the European Union ( firm-level analysis 
report), 2021  

 
33 
 share in worldwide patenting has significantly dropped in Robotics, now showing a large gap 
compared to China. When it comes to semi -conductors, the EU’s technology generation 
approximated by the number of patent applications is significantly b elow Japan and also lower 
than China and the US. Overall, this indicates that while the EU is positioning itself well when it 
comes to the ‘factory of the future’, it might be falling behind its main competitors in terms of 
scientific leadership and techno logy generation in other key areas that have important spill -over 
effects to many other ecosystems.  
The growth of venture capital backed start -ups and scale -ups provides for another 
indication of the EU’s comparative position across key technologies. It equally shows a 
divergent picture on performance across technologies ( Graph 11). For example, in fields such as 
Internet of Things, Nanotechnology and Industrial biotechnology the EU appears to have a 
relative advantage  compared to the US. At the same   time, in other areas including AI, cloud, 
cybersecurity and micro -electronics the number of EU venture capital backed start -ups and scale -
ups is lagging behind the levels seen in the US. Even larger differences are seen wh en 
considering total capital investments, with important gaps in investments compared to the US.58  
Graph 11: Number of active venture capital backed start -ups and scale -ups established 
since 2009 (left); total capital investments in advanced technologies (right, 2010 -2019)  
     
Source: Advanced Technologies for Industry project  
Note: Based on Crunchbase and Dealroom  
An analysis of the uptake of key technologies by EU businesses shows that while some are 
becoming more established, others are still only relevant in very specific sectors.  Relatively 
more established technologies such as cloud computing, cybersecurity and advanced 
manufacturing appear to play an important role supporting the EU’s digital transformation. Ot her 
technologies are showing lower but still promising adoption levels. This is the case, for example, 
for technologies such as AI or Internet of Things. A relatively high share of companies appear 
willing to invest in such technologies in the near future,  although the COVID -19 crisis might 
have a negative impact on these expectations. Technologies such as Industrial biotechnology 
show low adoption levels, as there are largely still used only by EU businesses in very specific 
sectors.  
                                                           
58 Which on the one hand is due to the prevalence of the much stronger venture capital market in the US, on the 
other hand, the comparison of total investment figures has to be interpreted with caution given the somewhat 
different coverage of data  

 
34 
 Graph 12: Advanced Technologies current uptake in the EU (2019)  
    
Source: Advanced Technologies for Industry project  
In addition to technology generation, entrepreneurial activity and uptake of technologies, it 
is also important to consider whether EU industry has access to the relevant technical and 
digital skills to fully capture the potential of technological advances . An approximation59 of 
available skills in the EU across different fields of technologies provides for a rough indication 
of this. Compared to the US, the EU has a higher relative share of professionals with skills in 
advanced manufacturing technologies, a dvanced materials, industrial biotechnology and 
nanotechnology. Nevertheless, the EU appears to lag behind the US when it comes to available 
skills in areas such as cloud technologies, big data, AI, cybersecurity and micro -electronics.  
Graph 13: Weighted share of professionals with advanced technology skills (proxy)  
    
Source: Advanced Technologies for Industry project. Note: Analysis relying on (online) self -reported skills by professionals  
                                                           
59 For more details on methodology: https://ati.ec.europa.eu/reports/eu -reports/advanced -technologies -industry -
methodological -report  

 
35 
 The EU’s performance in green technologies  
This Commission’s annual progress report on clean energy competitiveness60 has assessed 
the state and competitiveness of the EU as regards clean energy technologies. It includes a 
focus on six key technologies that are expected to play  an increasing role in the EU’s 2030 and 
2050 energy mix: offshore renewables (wind and ocean), solar photovoltaics (PV), renewable 
hydrogen, batteries and grid technologies.  
On the one hand, the report highlights the importance of regaining and strengthen ing EU’s 
competitive edge in the solar photovoltaic industry and the battery sector.  In the solar 
photovoltaic industry,  the EU has lost market share in some of the upstream parts of the value 
chain (such as solar PV cell and module manufacturing). Conside rable market opportunities exist 
in the segments of the value chain where specialisation or high value products are key. Building 
a sizeable EU PV manufacturing industry would also reduce the risk of supply disruptions and 
quality risks. Regarding batterie s, there is an ongoing competitive recovery by the EU, which is 
further assessed in chapter 5 of this staff working document.  
The EU holds a first mover advantage  in the wind, renewable hydrogen and ocean energy 
industries. At the same time, large increases in the capacity size of these markets are expected. 
This will require scaling up and realising economies of scale. The EU offshore wind industry has 
strong innovative capacity, while needing the perspective of a growing home market as well as 
sustained R&I funding to benefit from growth in global markets. Also in renewable hydrogen, 
European companies are well -placed to benefit from market growth (including thanks to their 
leading position on the electrolysers market). Still, large efforts to scal e up are needed to achieve 
a significant renewable hydrogen production capacity by 2030. Renewable hydrogen is further 
assessed in chapter 5. As regards ocean energy, technologies have yet to become commercially 
viable and further efforts are needed to mai ntain and expand the EU’s current leading position. 
Finally, the EU smart grid industry is relatively small but also competitive. Given its regulated 
nature, governments and regulators in the EU play a key role in developing the benefits of this 
industry.  
Emerging break -through technologies  
A horizon scanning of potentially important, disruptive innovations over the coming 15 to 
20 years reveals the expectation of high diffusion potential mainly in digital but also green 
innovation, making disruptive innova tion key for the twin transition.61 The main expectation 
is that digital technologies, which have gained importance in the COVID -19 crisis, have the 
highest diffusion potential in the 2038 horizon by increasing efficiency, effectiveness and 
convenience ever ywhere.62 With a somewhat less ubiquitous role, innovations in biology, energy 
                                                           
60 COM(2020) 953  
61 In 2018, a horizon scanning exercise identified 100 important radical innovation breakthroughs by 2038 regarding 
their potential techno -econo mic and social impacts (European Commission, 100 Radical Innovation Breakthroughs 
for the future, 2019)  
62 Varnai et al: The scientific, technological and socio -economic conditions of exit from the COVID 19 crisis (report 
to the EC), forthcoming  
 
36 
 and materials are expected to diffuse into highly digitised and automated industrial ecosystems 
and to bring massive improvements in (competitive) sustainability.63 
Emerging break -through technologies with a high likelihood of maturity by 2038 exist 
across different ecosystems. In the digital ecosystem, for example, important emerging 
technologies include areas such as speech recognition and computational creativity. In the 
electro nics ecosystem, examples of technologies with important potential include nano -leds, 
flexible electronics, 2D material based technologies64 and bio -degradable sensors. Also in 
ecosystems such as health (e.g. gene editing and therapy) and renewables (e.g. bi oplastics), there 
are several important break -through technologies with a high likelihood of maturity by 2038. 
While limited data is available to assess the EU’s performance in many of such emerging 
technologies, it is clear that they deserve attention fro m industry and policymakers.  
3.2 Europe’s research and innovation performance  
The EU’s performance in R&I gives insights in possible future developments of the EU’s 
competitive position in key technologies. R&I is a key driver that will define Europe’s 
performance when it comes to key technologies to support competitiveness, match the EU’s 
green and digital ambitions and safeguard the security and health of Europeans. The EU’s R&I 
performance compared to its gl obal competitors is creating concerns over (future) technological 
dependencies. While the EU is a global R&D powerhouse, accounting for almost 20 % of R&D 
worldwide65, it is threatened by global competitors in a number of innovation key indicators.  
Graph 14: BERD in EU and its main global competitors in bln EUR (left axis) and BERD 
intensity (%, right axis)  
 
Source: JRC elaboration based on Eurostat data  
Business expenditure on R&D is far below the US and has been caught up by China as well 
(Graph 14). EU business expenditure on R&D (BERD) was around 200 billion EUR in 2019, 
accounting for about 1.5% of GDP. Despite its 50% growth over the la st decade EU BERD 
                                                           
63 See Sach s, J.D, Schmidt -Traub, G., Mazzucato, M., Messner, D, Nakicenovic, and N., Rockström, J.: Six 
Transformations to Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, 2019 (Nature Sustainability); and M. Porter: 
Developing the EU’s ‘competitive sustainability’ for a resilient recovery and dynamic growth, 2018 (Cambridge 
Institute for Sustainability Leadership)  
64 https://graphene -flagship.eu/   
65 European Commission: Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 20 20, 2020  

 
37 
 has been caught up by Chinese BERD also in monetary terms and it is significantly lower (by 
45%) than the amounts that US businesses spend on R&D.  
Manufacturing BERD in the EU is performed mostly in the high tech (HT) and medium 
high tec h (MHT) sectors . In 2018, these sectors accounted for more than half of total BERD 
(56%) and for 83% of total manufacturing BERD. The main industrial sectors for BERD 
include the automotive industry, computer & electronic &  optical and pharmaceuticals. The 
decade long changes in these shares have been minor.  
Graph 15: Medium high tech and high tech manufacturing BERD as a share of total 
manufacturing BERD in EU  
 
Source: JRC elaboration based on Eurostat data  
Still, the share of EU high tech BERD is only less than half of that of the US. The US 
invests significantly more in HT compared to the EU (57% vs 27%) and less in the 
automotive and other MHT manufacturing. China’s HT BERD has only a slight ly lower 
share (24%) than that of the EU.  The EU’s scaling -up performance also lags behind the US and 
China: for each EU private unicorn in 2018 there were eight in the US and four in China.66  
Graph 16: Medium high tech (MHT) and high tech (HT) manufacturing BERD as a share 
of total manufacturing BERD in the US (left) and China (right)  
 
Source: JRC elaboration based on Eurostat data  
The EU (as well as the US) is also losing ground in favour of China with respect to scientific 
excellence and patenting.  Regarding scientific output measured by the top 1% highly cited 
                                                           
66 European Commission: Science, Research and Innovation Performance of the EU 2020, 2020  

 
38 
 publications, the EU is behind the US and also overtaken by China in 2015.67 Regarding world 
shares in transnational patent filings, the EU remains world leader, but t he gaps between the EU, 
US, Japan and China are narrowing.68  
Technological specialisation has deepened given similar R&D trends observed for over 10 
years, shaping specialisation patterns and increasing differences across regions, 
particularly between the EU and the US. Companies’ R&D investments in the EU and the US 
have increased significantly over the past ten years in the top four R&D investing sectors.69 In 
2010, EU companies in the automotive industry were investing more in R& D than their US 
counterparts, whereas US companies in the health and the ICT industries (both services and 
producers) invested the most in R&D. These differences have increased further in 2019, 
particularly in both ICT sectors. The ratio of R&D investment between the EU and the US 
remained constant in the health sector, increased significantly in the automotive sector and 
substantially decreased in both ICT sectors.   
Graph 17: R&D investment in 2010 -2019, comparison of selected sectors in the EU and 
US70 
 
Source: The 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard, European Commission  
A closer look to the EU and US data at the sub -sector level shows even more striking differences 
in R&D investment, for example in biotechnology and software & internet. In 2019, the US had 
many more companies in both sub -sectors (8.6 times more in biotechnology and 8.8 times more 
in software & internet) as well as significantly higher R&D investments (EUR 34.3 billion vs 
EUR 2.6 billion in biotech nology and EUR 92.7 billion vs EUR 7.5 billion in software & 
internet).  
 
                                                           
67 Commission elaboration based on INCITES (Web of Science) data  
68 Commission elaboration PATSTAT  
69 Source: European Commission (JRC/DG R& I): 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard. R&D in the 
Scoreboard is extremely concentrated, with the top four sectors contributing 77% of the total R&D: ICT producers 
(23.0%), health industries (20.5%), ICT services (16.9%), and the automotive indus try (16.3%).  
70 Note: data refers to 514 (EU:164, US:350) of the 805 companies (EU:204, US:601) in the four sector groups in 
the two regions considered for which R&D data are available for the all period 2010 -2019, accounting for 90.2% of 
the R&D in 2019.  

 
39 
 Graph 18: R&D investment in 2010 -2019, comparison of selected sectors in the EU and 
China71 
 
Source: The 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard, European Commission  
In the past 10 years, the  R&D investment of Chinese companies operating in the ICT 
sectors has overtaken that of EU companies . By contrast, the EU retained its lead in the health 
and automotive sectors. The average R&D investment per c ompany in the EU Industrial R&D 
Investment Scoreboard  has grown significantly in China in 2019.72 However, it has still 
remained little more than half of the average EU company (EUR 509.6 million). Thus, while 
overall EU firms’ R&D investments remain well a head of that of Chinese firms, the gap is 
continuously decreasing.  
Finally, when it comes to green technologies, it is crucial that the EU maintains its strong 
position. R&I as well as the development and uptake of eco -innovations will be key to achieving 
the climate goals. E xisting technology will not be able to deliver the full emissions reduction 
required to achieve EU climate objectives and new technologies should ideally become 
commercialised by 2030, to allow for timely scaling and deployment across t he EU by 2050.73 
At the same time, in the case of more mature techniques, necessary investment into large -scale 
demonstration and deployment will require increased pooling of resources.   
The EU makes too little use of its world -leading R&D in industry and must ensure a better 
transfer of that R&D into the economy,74 especially when it comes to green innovations.  
The EU currently has a higher share in clean energy technologies in overall patenting activity 
than most other major economies.75 The EU is also the global leader on high -value green patents 
(protected in at least two patent authorities), with Japan and the US following closely. 
                                                           
71 Note: Data refers to 347 (EU:164, CN:183) of the 497 companies (EU:204, CN:293) in the four sector groups in 
the two regions considered for which R&D data is available for the entire period, accounting for 91.1% of R&D in 
2019.  
72 From €47.2million in 201 0 to €274.4 million in 2019  
73 In-depth analysis in support of COM(2018)773: A Clean Planet for all - A European strategic long -term vision for 
a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral economy; European Commission: Science, Research and 
Innovat ion Performance of the EU 2020, 2020  
74 New ERA, COM(2020)628, chapter 2.3.  
75 Over the period 2010 -2016, the EU was second among major economies in terms of patenting activity in green 
technologies as a share of all inventions (at 9.5%), following South Kor ea at 10.3%, well above the global share of 
7% (European Commission: 2020 EU Industrial R&D Investment Scoreboard)  

 
40 
 Nevertheless, the green transition will depend on the degree to which the corresponding green 
innovations are created and dep loyed.  
In addition, there is an overall decrease in national budgets devoted to R&I in clean energy 
technologies and a lack of national objectives and funding targets that show concrete 
pathways to 2030 and 2050.76 Even though some Member States have been increasing efforts, 
overall, national budgets for clean energy research have been in slight decline in recent years77. 
The R&I budget allocated to energy in the EU represents 4.7% of total spending on R&I. In 
2018, the EU public R&I investment in clean ener gy technologies as a share of GDP was less 
than 0.03%, against around 0.05% in Japan or China. Estimates of private investment in the same 
areas have also been decreasing in recent years and amount to around 10% of the companies’ 
total expenditure in R&I.78 This is higher than the US, but lower than China.  
Graph 19: Estimated public79 and private80 R&I financing in the Energy Union R&I 
priorities  
 
Source: JRC81 based on IEA, Mission Innovation, Eurostat/OECD  
3.3 Conclusions  
This snapshot assessment of the EU’s performance in key technologies and R&I shows that 
the EU has certain strengths but is also at risk of falling behind in other areas that will 
drive future competitiveness.  While the EU still has a sufficient technological b ase, it is 
exposed to strong global competition. In some areas such as advanced manufacturing the EU 
seems to be performing well. Also in the area of certain green technologies (such as hydrogen, 
see chapter 5.4) the EU is highly competitive, while overall  efforts are needed for the EU to 
maintain and further build its strong position. At the same time,  the increased technological 
capacities of the EU’s competitors highlight the risk of the EU not being able to create and grow 
                                                           
76 COM(2020)564  
77 COM(2020)950; COM(2020)953  
78 Contrasted with BERD statistics: Eurostat/OECD  Business expenditure on R&D by NACE Rev. 2 acti vity and 
source of funds  
79 This excludes EU funds (2018 value; for EU27 partly estimated)  
80 Private R&I estimates for China are challenging and uncertain, given the differences in Intellectual Property 
protection and the difficulty in mapping the company structure (e.g. state backed companies) and financial reporting  
81https://setis.ec.europa.eu/publications/setis -research -innovation -data; Pasimeni, F.; Fiorini, A.; Georg akaki, A.; 
Marmier, A.; Jimenez Navarro, J. P.; Asensio Bermejo, J. M.: SETIS R&I country dashboards, 2018  

 
41 
 a sufficient number of firms i n certain key technology sectors.82 Furthermore, the EU’s R&D 
efforts in the digital ecosystem fall significantly behind those of the US and have been overtaken 
by China as well. Such lagging performance provides at least indications as regards possible 
(future) dependencies with regard to these technologies. If left unaddressed, strategic 
dependencies in the area of these technologies could further materialise and possibly new ones 
might emerge.  
Particular technologies where the EU’s competitive position ap pears to be weaker 
compared to its global commercial competitors include AI, High Performance Computing, 
Big Data,  cloud, industrial biotech and micro -electronics (including semi -conductors). 
These key technologies in the digital ecosystem deserve particul ar attention, as key enablers and 
sources of transformation for many other ecosystems (such as the defence and aerospace, 
automotive, agri -food and health ecosystems).  Chapter 5 of this staff working document provides 
in-depth reviews of the EU’s position and potential strategic dependencies in the areas of semi -
conductors and cloud technologies.  
 
 
 
  
                                                           
82 Moncada -Paternò -Castello P. and H. Hernandez (JRC Policy Insights, European Commission): Ten -year 
evolution of EU industrial R&D in the global cont ext, 2018  
 
42 
 4 Policy measures with a potential to address strategic dependencies  
Any measures addressing strategic dependencies would need to be designed and applied on 
a case -by-case basis, taking into account the specific nature of the dependency, the global 
situation and the policy objectives pursued within the ecosystem concerned. They would 
need to build on in -depth discussion and dialogue with Member States and industry. Dialogue 
with industry (e.g. in the context of the Industrial Forum) is particularly important when it comes 
to better understanding the impact of certain depende ncies and the drivers of current supply 
patterns.  
A detailed understanding of the functioning of relevant value chains as well as the potential 
risks that specific strategic dependencies entail to the EU’s core interests allows building 
policy measures tha t would aim at address dependencies in a targeted manner .83 This would 
allow taking proportionate measures, without compromising the open and trade -based EU 
economy and ensuring competition is not distorted. Addressing strategic dependencies requires 
target ed measures depending on the dependency concerned and its potential risks. Different 
alternatives should be carefully examined with a view to maintaining the competitiveness of the 
EU and choosing to address dependencies in the most cost -efficient manner.  
4.1  Relevant measures to address external and internal strategic trade dependencies  
There are differences between external and internal (concentration of activity at a firm 
level within the Single Market) dependencies also when it comes to identifying relevant 
types of policy measures.  Different types of measures may play a role when it comes to 
considering how to mitigate risks of external and internal dependencies.   
Measures to address external trade dependencies considered strategic  
Policy measures to address external strategic dependencies can be diverse.  On the one hand, 
they should ensure that the EU reinforces its position in global value chains by strengthening and 
diversifying external trade. On the other hand, the EU should strengthen its own  capacity in 
strategic areas where necessary, building on the strengths of a fully functioning Single Market 
with open and competitive markets.   
On the external side, the diversification of import sources is a key element when it comes to 
increasing the E U’s resilience in a context of global uncertainty and growing international 
tensions.  A strong EU engagement in multilateral cooperation and coordination mechanisms is 
important for this, including when it comes to preparing for a future crisis. At the sam e time, 
companies themselves play the key role in this regard as they are able to assess risks and take 
action so that they are able to tap into a sufficiently diversified and environmentally sustainable 
set of suppliers.  
                                                           
83 For example, in the area of raw materials in addition to a regular review of the EU’s critical raw materials list, the 
Commission has recently also carried out specific foresight work to obtain a better understanding of the EU’s future 
raw material needs in particular in light of the green and digital transitions (see European Commission: Critical Raw 
Materials for Strategic Technologies and Sectors in the EU - A Foresight Study, 2020)  
 
43 
 Public policy can facilitate the process of diversification to alternative sources of supply 
and strengthening of existing supply chains. The recent Trade Policy Review provides the 
basis and direction for this. A reinforced use of the EU’s trade policy tools can contribute to 
obtaining a ccess to new and improve access to existing global markets as well as ensuring an 
undistorted functioning of existing supply chains, based on a stable, rules -based trading 
framework. This requires building partnerships with like -minded partners and further  engaging 
with a range of markets and countries around the world. In addition, trade policy also plays an 
important role in allowing EU businesses to compete on an equal footing with third country 
businesses. Better enforcing existing trade agreements and ensuring effective defence against 
unfair trade practices are key in this regard, including in those areas where the EU currently 
faces possible strategic dependencies. Likewise, the Commission plans to adopt as a follow -up to 
the White Paper on foreign su bsidies84 a proposal for a new instrument to address possible 
distortive effects of foreign subsidies in the Single Market particularly in relation to 
concentrations and public procurement.  
On the internal side, the EU can address strategic dependencies by increasing or 
diversifying domestic production and where necessary and possible also consider strategic 
stockpiling. In addition to diversifying sources of imports (or where the potential of such 
diversification is limited), the EU can also develop or impr ove its own capacity in strategic 
areas.85 In addition, a crisis preparedness strategy (including e.g. the building of stocks or the 
development of alternatives, possibly together with international partners) can also be of 
relevance for certain strategic a reas, including when it is not fully possible or efficient to 
substitute foreign goods with domestic production.  
Achieving increased EU capacity in areas considered strategic requires a fully functioning 
and competitive Single Market. Actions taken to faci litate a better functioning Single Market 
are key when it comes to ensuring increased strategic capacity in specific areas.  Fostering the 
growth of firms and increasing industrial dynamics both via the ecosystems and the Single 
Market is key to achieving the twin transition.86 The EU would need to ensure that regulatory 
frameworks are fit for purpose and provide legal certainty to facilitate large -scale investments. 
Unnecessary or disproportionate barriers to the Single Market that hinder innovative businesses 
from exploiting opportunities of scale should be removed, particularly for areas of strategic 
importance.87 The Single Market Programme can be a key facilitator in this regard. Furthermore, 
open and competitive markets support resilience. Competi tion policy is key in this regard as a 
tool to promote innovation and foster a competitive industrial fabric, including in areas of 
strategic importance. The use of existing tools such as Important Projects of Common European 
Interest have already shown to  offer important potential benefits in specific areas where the 
                                                           
84 See COM (2020)253 on levelling the playing field as re gards foreign subsidies  
85 Demand -side substitution policies may also be relevant, diversifying or changing demand for specific products  
86 JRC policy brief: EU corporate R&D intensity gap: structural features call for a better understanding of industrial 
dynamics, 2016. 
https://iri.jrc.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/contentype//publ ication//policybriefs//1568801201//EU%20corporate%
20R%26D%20intensity%20gap%20_PolicyBrief.pdf   
87 See also COM(2020)93 on identifying and addressing barriers to the Single Marke t and COM(2020)94 on the 
Long term action plan for better implementation and en forcement of single market rules  
 
44 
 market alone cannot deliver breakthrough innovation, while ensuring that the benefits are shared 
across the EU economy. Industrial alliances can also serve as a platform to convene and rally a  
wide range of stakeholders in a given area to uncover opportunities and address bottlenecks in 
achieving the EU policy objectives.  Finally, the COVID -19 crisis has also indicated that in 
exceptional cases, specific solutions (such as advance purchase agre ements) allow investments to 
be made  in a context of high cost and high failure rates.  
Modern, well -managed and efficient procurement by public authorities can also play an 
important role in increasing resilience. Smart procurement already today takes up a central 
part in enabling the achievement of key priorities (e.g. related to the green transition, innovation 
and social objectives) across many ecosystems. The role of public procurement and specific 
criteria in reducing dependencies and thus strengtheni ng the resilience of different ecosystems 
can be further explored and developed.  
Targeted funding geared towards strategic priorities and investments in research can also 
provide a key contribution to building capacity and increasing resilience.  The Recov ery and 
Resilience Facility provides a major boost in this regard. In addition, support for research and 
innovation can help to extend the EU’s strategic industrial capabilities including in new and 
emerging areas. For example, Horizon Europe is already pr oviding support to research and 
innovation in different areas of strategic importance (e.g. raw materials, batteries, quantum 
technologies).88  
SMEs may require specific support to diversify supply chains and increase their resilience.  
Strategic dependencie s have a particular impact on SMEs, as they are more vulnerable to lock -in 
effects and high switching costs. A recent SME survey89 highlights that the COVID -19 crisis 
strongly or moderately affected seventy -two percent of respondents because of supply chain  
disruptions, employee absences and temporary shutdowns. In addition, SMEs were not well 
prepared: almost two thirds of respondents had no plan in place to handle supply chain 
disruptions. One third created such a plan during the pandemic.  
Developing the skills of the EU workforce in identified areas of strategic importance can 
help the EU build capacity.  This requires mapping -out the skills needed and supporting 
workers in acquiring them. Such efforts would help regain skills that might have been transfer red 
to parts of the value chain located outside the EU, or learn new ones that emerge as the economy 
transforms. Developing skills can increase EU workers’ productivity, ensuring that an increased 
EU production in certain areas is at the same time also eco nomically efficient.  
For several of the possible external strategic dependencies highlighted in chapter 2.3, 
actions have been initiated or further developed since the March 2020 Industry Strategy. 
                                                           
88 It should also be noted that for actions related to Union strategic assets, interests, autonomy or security, the 
Horizon Europe work programme may provide that the participation can be limited to legal entities establishe d only 
in Member States, or to legal entities established in specified associated or other third countries in addition to 
Member States. In addition, exceptionally and for duly justified reasons, entities established in the Union or in 
Associated Countries  directly or indirectly controlled by non -associated third countries or by legal entities of non -
associated third countries may also be excluded from individual calls for proposals.  
89 EU Survey carried out by European Commission July -December 2020  
 
45 
 Chapter 2.3 identified possible strategic dependencies fo r a number of products, notably in the 
energy intensive industries ecosystem (including raw/processed materials and chemicals), the 
health ecosystem (including active pharmaceutical ingredients and other health related products) 
as well as other inputs and  products that are relevant to support the green and digital 
transformation. Several recent initiatives aim to address these dependencies or assess them in 
more detail.  
Firstly, in the area of raw materials, the action plan on critical raw materials90 (Sept ember 
2020) presents the challenges for a secure and sustainable supply of critical raw materials 
and actions to increase EU resilience and open strategic autonomy. In the context of this 
action plan, actions taken to address strategic dependencies consist  of both internal EU capacity 
building as well as strengthening and diversifying external sources.  Actions taken to build up EU 
production capacities include identifying and developing viable industrial projects on critical raw 
materials exploration, extra ction, processing and refining; launching research and innovation; 
developing relevant expertise and skills; and deploying Earth -observation programmes and 
remote sensing. The action plan also aims to make better use of the potential of recycling and 
secon dary critical raw materials. On the external side, the strategy sets out that EU will continue 
to diversify supply from third countries and strengthen rules -based open trade in raw materials 
and remove distortions to international trade. The EU will also e ngage in strategic partnerships 
with resource -rich third countries to secure a diversified, sustainable and responsible supply of 
critical raw materials.  The Commission will implement parts of the critical raw materials action 
plan together with the Europe an Raw Materials Alliance. The alliance will identify barriers, 
opportunities and investment cases to build capacity at all stages of the raw materials value 
chain, from mining to waste recovery. Chapter 5 will provide a more detailed analysis on the 
natur e and impact of strategic dependencies as well as relevant measures in the area of raw 
materials.  
Furthermore, the chemicals strategy for sustainability was adopted in October 2020.91 One 
of the key actions of the strategy is to promote the EU’s resilience of supply and sustainability of 
critical chemicals. In this context, the Commission is stepping up strategic foresight in the field 
of chemicals together with relevant stakeholders i ncluding by gathering more in -depth evidence 
on chemicals that are critical for the Europe’s societal and economic resilience and the green and 
digital transition of industrial ecosystems.  
Secondly, in the area of health, the Commission Communication on bu ilding a European 
Health Union (November 2020)92 proposes actions to reinforce the EU’s resilience for cross -
border health threats. The COVID -19 crisis showed that the EU lacked effective mechanisms 
and structures to monitor demand and supply of critical me dical countermeasures and support 
Member States in addressing shortages. Different measures were taken during the crisis to 
                                                           
90 COM(20 20)474  
91 COM(2020)667  
92 COM(2020)724  
 
46 
 address these shortcomings (e.g. stockpiling of emergency medical equipment93 and offering 
regulatory flexibility while maintaining s afety standards). In addition, the Communication on a 
European Health Union proposes further actions aimed at increasing resilience to all cross -border 
health threats and providing European citizens with a high level of public health. It  focuses on 
crisis preparedness and response measures  such as strengthening coordination at EU -level when 
facing cross -border health threats; revising the mandates of the European Centre for Disease 
Prevention and Control and of the European Medicines Agency to provide stronger surveillance, 
scientific analy sis and guidance before and during a crisis; and setting up a new EU agency for 
biomedical preparedness.  
In addition, the Pharmaceuticals Strategy for Europe (November 2020) presents actions to 
ensure accessibility, availability and affordability of medici nes, including through 
diversified and secure supply chains . Specifically on the issue of supply security of medicines, 
the Commission is steering a structured dialogue with relevant actors in the pharmaceuticals 
value chain, public authorities and other s takeholders. In a first phase, the structured dialogue 
aims at obtaining a more detailed understanding of the functioning of global pharmaceutical 
supply chains and identifying the precise causes and drivers of different potential vulnerabilities. 
In a sec ond phase, the structured dialogue will allow putting forward a set of possible measures 
and policy options.  These will aim to address possible vulnerabilities, including potential 
dependencies, and ensure the security of supply and the availability of cri tical medicines, active 
pharmaceutical ingredients and raw materials. Chapter 5 will provide a more detailed analysis on 
the nature and impact of strategic dependencies as well as relevant possible measures in the area 
active pharmaceutical ingredients.  
Thirdly, a number of recent and forthcoming initiatives aim to address strategic 
dependencies in the area of green and digital.  For example, the Commission’s proposal for a 
new regulatory framework on batteries94 aims to ensure that there are robust sustainab ility, 
safety and performance requirements for all batteries placed on the EU market. In addition, a 
second Important Project of European Interest in the area of batteries was authorised in January 
2021. Similarly, the recent Digital Services Act and Digit al Markets Act package95 opens up new 
opportunities for businesses that depend on gatekeeper platforms to offer their services in the 
Single Market, as they will be able to innovate and compete in a fair and balanced market. In 
addition, the Commission will  soon propose a Data Act96 to provide the best conditions for the 
access to and control over data in B2B and B2G situations. Also, the proposed regulatory 
framework on Artificial Intelligence has the twin objective of creating ecosystems of excellence 
and t rust to promote the development and uptake of AI while addressing the risks associated with 
certain uses of this technology. Such regulatory initiatives would allow providing legal certainty 
                                                           
93 In the context of the COVID -19 crisis the Commission has set up a strategic rescEU stockpile of medical 
equipment. This common European stock of medical equipment is hosted by nine Member States (as of January 
2021) a nd includes products such as medical masks, gloves, gowns and ventilators. It has already delivered essential 
medical supplies to a number of countries participating in the EU Civil Protection Mechanism that have requested 
assistance via that mechanism.  
94 COM(2020)798  
95 https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/digital -services -act-package   
96 See COM(2020) 66, ‘A European strategy for data’  
 
47 
 for investments and place European players at the forefront of th ese technological developments. 
Chapter 5 will provide a more detailed analysis on the nature and impact of strategic 
dependencies as well as relevant possible measures in the areas of lithium -ion batteries, cloud 
and edge computing, and semi -conductors.  
Policy measures in the context of internal Single Market dependencies linked to concentration of 
activities  
In view of possible internal dependencies on a limited number of sources within the EU 
(notably linked to possible concentration of activities at a f irm level), it is of key importance 
to safeguard a free flow of goods and services across the Single Market. The internal Single 
Market disruptions experienced particularly during the first wave of the pandemic have 
highlighted the importance of a function ing Single Market where all Europeans can rely fully on 
the capacities held by individual Member States. For example, national bans or other restrictions 
on intra -EU exports undermined the principle of European solidarity and created a domino effect 
across  the Single Market. In addition, they were subject to frequent adjustments exacerbating 
legal uncertainty and triggered uncoordinated stockpiling responses. Businesses repeatedly 
underlined the negative impact on their supply chains of export restrictions within the Single 
Market established in the context of COVID -19. The Commission worked to lift around 30 of 
such restrictions during the first wave of the pandemic.  This shows  the need for structural 
solutions to safeguard and strengthen the functioning of  the Single Market during times of 
emergency.  
In addition, competition policy plays a key role by enabling lively entrepreneurial 
ecosystems in Europe. A well -functioning Single Market with strong business dynamics and 
competition is also key when it come s to mitigating the possible risks of internal dependencies 
linked to a potential concentration of critical supplies at firm level. Generally, market entry of 
new firms in a given sector has positive effects on competition, allocative efficiency and overal l 
competitiveness of the sector. In sectors of strategic importance, a higher level of diversification 
(and lower concentration) of individual sources within the Single Market also increases the EU’s 
resilience to unexpected shocks (e.g. natural disasters) . This is important, for example, in 
situations where a very limited number of EU production facilities is producing certain critical 
products. Competition policy plays an essential role in this regard by ensuring access to 
diversified sources of supply wi thin the EU and preventing too strong reliance on a few players 
or products.  
Finally, the EU’s integration into global value chains can also play an important role in 
mitigating possible risks related to internal dependencies. Together with a functioning Single 
Market, potential risks related to internal dependencies are further reduced by the EU’s open 
economy being integrated in an effective and fair global trading system. Global trade can notably 
help to diversify supply sour ces and sustain demand for our industrial output. International trade 
helps not only to cushion possible shocks and disruptions having an impact on internal EU value 
chains, but also to ensure that the EU can meet its internal demand in case of rapidly inc reasing 
demand of certain goods.   
 
48 
 4.2 Relevant measures in the area of key technologies  
Chapter 3 highlighted a number of challenges the EU faces in comparison with other 
economies in the areas of key technologies.  While the EU has certain strengths (e.g. in the area 
of advanced manufacturing), it is also at risk of falling behind in certain other areas (e.g. cloud) 
that will drive future competitiveness. Furthermore, the EU’s efforts in research and 
development show important gaps in comparison with internati onal competitors notably in the 
digital ecosystem, highlighting concerns over technological dependencies increasing or possible 
new ones emerging.  
It is paramount to step up cooperation with industry on research and innovation providing 
increased certainty  for private engagement based on a common agenda for technological 
development.  The pandemic is leading to shrinking turnover and profits, often leaving even less 
room for company investment. There is a need for more favourable conditions supporting the 
emergence and growth of companies and investments in strategic and R&D intensive sectors of 
economic and social interest. In addition, the capacity of traditional (and mature) medium - and 
low-technology sectors – where Europe is comparatively strong – to abs orb new technologies 
should be strengthened. It is essential to crowd in private investment to this end and to provide 
directionality and ambition to public support. The Commission will develop industrial 
technology roadmaps97 for a number of priority ecosy stems offering a common vision for 
technological development with industry and Member States. They will make concrete 
recommendations to speed up the transfer of research results into the real economy, linking 
relevant partnerships under Horizon Europe wit h industrial ecosystems.   
The Recovery and Resilience Facility and the Digital Europe programme provide major 
opportunities to step up investments in advanced digital technologies and turn the 
immediate challenges presented by the COVID -19 into a long -term opportunity. On top of 
existing funding programmes, 20% of the Recovery and Resilience Facility has been reserved for 
digital investments and reforms. Several of the flagship initiatives identified by the Commission 
are targeted towards a stronger generation and uptake of digital technologies (including 
“connect”, “modernise”, “scale -up” and “reskill and upskill”).98 In addition, the Digital Europe 
programme aims to build the strategic digital capacities of the EU and to facilitate the wide 
deployment of digital technologies in the EU.99  
Investment in Multi -Country Projects can target strategic dependencies in the area of 
technologies more effectively.  The Digital Decade communication proposes investments in a set 
of multi -country projects around 4 pillars: digital infrastructure, di gital skills and education, 
digitalisation of businesses and digital government. Such projects include deploying a common 
and multi -purpose pan -European interconnected data processing infrastructure; endowing the EU 
with capabilities in electronics design and deployment of the next generation of low power 
                                                           
97 As announced in the European Research Area Communication (new ERA)   
98 SWD(2021)12  
99 For duly justified security reasons, participation of EU -based entities controlled from third countries may be 
excluded from specific actions under the programme (Article 12 (5) and (6) of th e Digital Europe Regulation)  
 
49 
 trusted processors; deploying 5G corridors along major pathways; connecting public 
administrations with interoperable services; supporting the digitisation of industry via European 
Digital Innovation Hubs;  and developing specialised ICT education and training. The Digital 
Policy Programme foreseen under the Digital Decade Communication will set up a mechanism 
to enable the Commission to engage with Member States with the objective of taking joint 
commitment s as well as possible measures at EU and national level. The variety of mechanisms 
that has been used for different projects and investments until now has revealed a gap in the 
Commission’s toolbox to combine funding from Member States, the EU budget and p rivate 
investment for the purposes of deploying and operating infrastructures and services of common 
interest, outside the research area. In this regard, the Council conclusions of 25 March 2021100 
also highlight the need for appropriate vehicles to support multi -country projects.  
Cohesion policy co -funds research and innovation actions in areas where regions have 
particular strengths, while supporting the reinforcement of EU value chains in key 
technologies . The new Interregional Innovation Investment instru ment (I3) will bring together 
partners from different Member States and regions to develop joint investment to accompany 
Europe and its regions in their efforts to strengthen the EU on the global stage and facilitate the 
recovery.  
Skills are crucial to the  development and uptake of new technologies, to address existing or 
potential future strategic dependencies in key technologies.  Important ongoing initiatives in 
this regard include the European Skills Agenda as well as the Pact for Skills. In addition, 
pursuing gender equality could be crucial as closing the gender gap in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics (STEM) careers would be key for the EU to meet its needs in terms 
of ICT professionals in years to come.  
Important Projects of Common Euro pean Interest (IPCEIs) provide a State aid 
compatibility basis under Art. 107(3)(b) TFEU under which Member States can jointly 
design large cross -border projects to achieve EU strategic goals in areas where the market 
alone cannot deliver breakthrough inno vations. Furthermore and as also announced in the 
Industry Strategy of March 2020, the Commission will revise in a targeted manner the applicable 
State aid rules in 2021 to facilitate further SMEs’ participation in future IPCEIs and clarify 
further the app licable state aid criteria, while at the same time continue to respect the EU’s 
international obligations.101  
Industrial alliances can play a key role in building up EU capacity in specific strategic 
areas through joint action by all the interested partners . Industrial alliances are already used 
                                                           
100 SN 18/21, para 4: ‘We stress the need to strengthen the competitiveness and resilience of the European Union’s 
industry, including SMEs, to accelerate its green and digital transitions, including through appropriate vehicles to 
support multi -country projects […]’  
101 The ongoing adaptation of relevant horizontal State aid Guidelines, including the Communication on Important 
projects of common European interest, the Regional aid Guidelines, the Framework on Research, Development and 
innovation, the Risk Finance Guidelines as well as the Environmental and Energy Guidelines, together with the 
review of the transport specific aviation and railway state aid guidelines , will ensure that they are fit for purpose for 
an economy that is c hanging fast, increasingly digital and must become greener and more circular. The adaptation 
process follows the Better Regulation principles (including public consultations of industry and Member States).   
 
50 
 as one of the delivery vehicles for existing EU strategies including in the fields of hydrogen, raw 
materials and plastics. Possible new alliances can be considered including in the area of 
advanced technologies, whe re proved a well -targeted and efficient tool.  
The EU Space Programmes are effectively strategic capacities, built up by sustained 
investment over decades by Member States and the EU in strategic infrastructure and 
technologies.  Both Copernicus and Galileo  contribute strongly to the EU’s open strategic 
autonomy by providing global Earth Observation data and satellite navigation services, which 
are used in a wide range of applications, including critical security applications and monitoring 
of greenhouse gas ses, crucial for the green deal. Simultaneously, those EU space capabilities act 
as a positive lever for multilateral cooperation, for example in climate action with Copernicus 
data, in satellite navigation for security applications with the US, and provid ing satellite 
navigation services in Africa. Thereby, those EU flagships represent open strategic autonomy in 
action.  
Finally, the Commission’s Action plan on synergies between civil, defence and space 
industries identifies a (non -exhaustive) number of cri tical technologies that are relevant 
across the civil (with a focus on security), defence and space industry domains. Several of 
these identified critical technologies include technologies highlighted in Chapter 3 for which the 
EU appears to be facing chal lenges compared to its global competitors (e.g. cloud, semi -
conductors). In the context of this Action plan, the Commission will set up an EU Observatory of 
Critical Technologies that can provide a regular monitoring and analysis of these critical 
technolo gies, their potential applications, the value chains, the desired EU control over them and 
the existing gaps and dependencies. Every second year, this Observatory, in consultation with 
key stakeholders, will produce a classified report. On the basis of the se reports, the Commission 
will develop technology roadmaps to stimulate cross -fertilisation between civil, defence and 
space industries for critical technologies.  
  
 
51 
 5 Reviews of a selected number of strategic areas  
This chapter provides more in -depth reviews for a number of strategic areas. As for any 
area of strategic importance, policy intervention would need to build on a thorough 
understanding and detailed analysis of the functioning of relevant value chains as w ell as the 
underlying drivers of Europe’s current and possible future strategic dependencies and the risks 
they entail.  This chapter provides in -depth reviews of a number areas that can be considered 
strategic for Europe’s interests. They look into the nat ure of possible strategic dependencies, 
their impact as well as relevant (ongoing) policy responses.  
These assessments should not be considered as an exhaustive analysis of all the EU’s 
possible strategic dependencies, but rather as a first stage of asses sments concerning a 
number of important areas.  Further key areas, including products, services or technologies key 
to the twin transition such as renewables or energy storage,  can be considered and analysed in 
more detail in the future.        
The chapter develops reviews of six specific areas. Four reviews (hydrogen, raw materials, 
batteries and active pharmaceutical ingredients) look further into possible strategic dependencies 
that were identified through the bottom -up mapping of dependencies  developed in chapter 2.  
Another two reviews (semi -conductors and cloud and edge computing) look into examples of 
technological areas where the EU appears to be falling behind in relation to its global 
competitors as highlighted in chapter 3, creating conc erns over possible technological strategic 
dependencies in the digital ecosystem.  
  
 
52 
 5.1 Raw materials  
Access to resources is fundamental for the entire EU industry and central to Europe’s 
ambition to deliver the Green Deal and ensure the digital transformation of the EU 
economy . These ambitions will need to continue to be anchored in diversified and undistorted 
access to global markets for raw materials.  
a) Context and possible weaknesses in the EU  
As the EU does not produce raw materials that can m eet our demand, EU industry faces 
global competition in access to raw materials . The OECD102 estimates that material extraction 
doubled since 1990 and that global consumption of resources will  grow up to 40% by 2040 and 
close to 90% by 2060 (both values as compared to 2017). This puts high pressure on the 
resilience of raw materials supply chain s globally.  
Graph 20: Global material use by resource type: a) historical data (world, 1990 - 2017) and 
b) projection (world, 2018 - 2060)  
 
Source: European Commission, Raw materials Scoreboard in preparation. Adapted from OECD ( 2019), ´Global Material 
Resources Outlook to 2060´.   
Metals and minerals are part of our daily lives.  With the transition of Europe’s industry to 
climate -neutrality, the reliance on available fossil fuels will progressively be replaced with 
reliance on non-energy raw materials . For many of them, the EU sources from abroad and 
global competition is fierce. Those raw materials that are very important economically and 
have a high supply risk are called critical raw materials. Critical raw materials are esse ntial 
to the functioning and integrity of a wide range of industrial ecosystems. Rare earths based 
magnets move electric cars and make wind turbines work. Gallium and indium are part of light -
emitting diode (LED) technology in lamps. Semiconductors need si licon metal. Hydrogen fuel 
cells and electrolysers need platinum group metals.  
                                                           
102 OECD, Global Material Resources Outlook to 2060: Economic Drivers and Environmental Consequences 
(OECD Publishing, Paris), 2019. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264307452 -en  

 
53 
 Dependence on critical raw materials of nine strategic technologies and three sectors has 
been analysed103 as a part of the EU raw materials criticality assessment in 2020.  Graph 21 
shows competition of technologies and sectors for the same materials. For example, wind energy 
and traction motors compete both for various rare earths, as well as for borates; robotics and 
drones also use motors; fuel cells and digital technologies require a large amount of platinum 
group metals (PGMs).  
Graph 21: Flows of raw materials and their current supply risks to the selected 
technologies and sectors  
 
Source: E uropean Commission, Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 2020  
b) Origin of vulnerabilities  
The EU identified 30 critical raw materials in 2020.  Their supply is highly concentrated. For 
example, in the perio d of 2012 -2016, China provided 98  % of the EU’s supply of rare earth 
elements (REE), Turkey provided 98% of the EU’s supply of borate, and South Africa provided 
71% of the EU’s needs for platinum and an even higher share of the platinum group metals 
iridiu m, rhodium, and ruthenium. The EU relies on single EU companies for its supply of 
hafnium and strontium.  
 
 
                                                           
103 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/42881    

 
54 
 Graph 22: Biggest supplier countries of critical raw materials to the EU  
 
Source: European Commission, Study on the EU’s list of Critical Raw Materials (2020)  
Many supplier countries of raw materials increasingly impose restrictions on exports of 
minerals and metals. The continuing growth of the global demand of metals and non -metallic 
minerals could lead to more restrictio ns to secure local supply or foster the domestic downstream 
industry. The share of global production of cobalt, rare earths and tungsten affected by export 
restrictions was higher than 70% (as of 2018, see Graph 23).  
Graph 23: Share of global primary production of five selected raw materials subject to 
export restrictions (world, 2014, 2017 and 2018)  
 
Source: European Commission, Raw materials Scoreboard in preparation. JRC, based on data on export restrictions provided by 
OECD, ‘Inventory on Restrictions on Exports of Raw Materials’ and data on global production data from C. Reichl and M. 
Schatz (2019).  
The EU is very  dependent on imports of the raw materials needed for key products and 
technologies.  Graph 24 shows  current supply risks across a number of key products  and 
technologies in the subsequent stages of processed materials, components and assemblies. For 

 
55 
 example, the EU only provides 1% or less of some specific raw materials for Li -on batteries, 
wind turbines and electric traction motors.  
Graph 24: Identified supply risks for the EU and EU shares of production  
 
Source: European Commission, Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 2020  
Note: Percentage means proportion of EU on the global production. Products and technologies highlighted above (from top to 
bottom) are: Li -on batteries, fuel cells, wind energy, electric traction motors, photovoltaic technology, robotics, drones and 3D 
printing. Supply risks are highlighted from red (v ery high) to green (low).  
In addition to current supply risks, demand for multiple raw materials is expected to 
strongly increase across different sectors and technologies.  Graph 25 shows the expected 
increases in the use of a number of critical raw materials for the renewables and e -mobility 
sectors by 2030 and 2050 (according to low, medium and high demand scenarios). F urthermore, 
additional increases in use can be expected from other sectors, including defence and aerospace 
as well as digitalisation (e.g. handheld devices use batteries, sensors and motors; data is stored on 
drives containing permanent magnets; etc.).  
 
 
 
 

 
56 
 Graph 25: Critical raw materials use in different technologies in the EU in 2030 and 2050  
 
Source: European Commission, Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 2020  
The EU is well -endowed with aggregates and industrial minerals, as well as certain base metals 
such as copper and zinc. It is less successful in developing projects to produce critical raw 
materials, even though there is significant potential  for some of t hese. As the timeframes for 
starting extractive operations are quite long, these tend to lag behind price peaks. Price drops 
during the start -up time can therefore reduce economic viability and result in freezing the activity 
before it has started.  
The ea rly phase from inception to permitting constitutes a high -risk phase of project 
development and is particularly vulnerable. This is partly due to the inherent risk and cost of 
new projects, lack of incentives and financing, the diversity and length of nati onal permitting 
procedures, and the lack of public acceptance for mining in Europe.  
Access to resources and sustainability is key for the resilience of the EU raw materials 
supply chains . Achieving resource security requires diversified supply from both pr imary and 

 
57 
 secondary sources, reduced dependencies and improved resource efficiency and circularity, 
including sustainable product design. This is true for all raw materials, including base metals, 
industrial minerals, aggregates and biotic materials, but i s even more necessary when it concerns 
those raw materials that are critical for the EU.  
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
In the fall of 2020, the Commission adopted the Critical Raw Materials action plan that outlines 
a set of concrete actions to tackle vulnerabilities in the raw materials supply chains.  
Building resilient value chains in the EU  
The first action under the action plan was the launch of the European Raw Materials Alliance 
(ERMA)  in September 2020. ERMA has started its work towards developing a resilient 
European value chain for the rare earths and permanent magnets in eMotors (see a lso chapter 
5.3). Its role is to facilitate investment in the raw materials value chain. Downstream 
manufacturers such as automotive OEMs, wind turbine manufacturers and the defence and 
aerospace industries need to provide strong support to developing a re silient European supply 
chain for eMotors. Member States and industry can assess the situation and decide on the 
investments needed for the production of rare earths and their refining, magnetic alloys, 
magnets and their recycling, building on the investme nt pipeline prepared by ERMA.  
The pipeline as it currently stands would contribute to addressing important raw material 
dependencies. The EU currently imports all permanent magnets for wind turbines, mostly from 
China. Offshore wind turbines contain on av erage 600 kg of permanent magnets per MW, while 
onshore wind turbines contain 80 -160 kg/MW, such that an average wind turbine in Europe 
contains 230kg/MW. Installed EU wind energy capacity today is 220 GW. According to 
estimates by WindEurope104, 397 GW of wind energy capacity would be installed in the EU by 
2030 in a High Scenario. On average, this implies an annual wind capacity addition of 18 GW, 
which would increase to around 25 GW when taking into account replacements of old turbines. 
ERMA  identified in vestment projects with a potential to increase rare earths magnets production 
capacity. If these projects were fully implemented this would be sufficient to cover around 60% 
of the EU annually installed wind energy capacity by rare earths magnets made in t he EU105. 
Regarding battery raw materials, the EU foresight study on Critical Raw Materials estimates, for 
a high -demand scenario, an annual EU demand of 500,000 tonnes of nickel for e -mobility and 
renewable energy by 2030. ERMA has identified investment pro jects with a potential to increase 
production from 10,000 tonnes to 100,000 tonnes nickel capacity per year, representing 20% of 
projected EU annual demand in 2030.  
Investments   
Under Action 5 of the action plan, together with Member States and ERMA, the C ommission 
identifies mining and processing investment projects, as well as investment needs  and related 
financing opportunities for critical raw materials in the EU that can be operational by 2025, 
                                                           
104 https://windeurope.org/about -wind/reports/wind -energy -in-europe -scena rios-for-2030/   
105 Source: ERMA estimates  
 
58 
 prioritizing coal -mining regions. ERMA will also support t he development of projects and 
facilitate contact with investors. Significant investments would be needed in order for Europe to 
compete with the current global raw materials market leaders. The two IPCEIs on the battery 
value chain already include raw mat erial projects (R&I and First Industrial Deployment) on 
sustainable mining, refining and recycling. Such concerted action could also be of relevance in 
the area of eMotors, including electricity generators . 
Recovery funds . The EU raw materials sector has b een left in a vulnerable position due to lack 
of investment. The Recovery and Resilience Facility provides an opportunity for Europe to 
reverse certain trends and create new competences and markets. Given the fast -moving nature of 
today’s economy, adopting  a proactive stance with regard to this issue will prove indispensable. 
Under the Recovery and Resilience Facility EUR 672.5 billion in loans and grants will be 
available to support post COVID -19 recovery projects. These will have to be committed by 
2023 a nd implemented by 2026. Member States are encouraged to identify possibilities to 
allocate funding and develop recovery projects in the raw materials value chains, especially 
for critical raw materials and base metals.  
R&D investment. Under Action 3 of the action plan, research and innovation on waste 
processing, advanced materials and substitution will be undertaken using Horizon Europe, the 
European Regional Development Fund and national R&I programmes. Under the first Work 
Programme of Horizon Europe 2021 -2022, a set of raw materials -related research and 
innovation actions will be funded with a budget of almost 300 million EUR. They will focus 
on exploration, mining, processing, refining, recycling and substitution, as well as develop ing 
skills, promoting responsible mining practices, fostering international cooperation with resource 
rich countries, mapping secondary sources in the EU and identifying investment needs.  
International cooperation  
Under Action 9 of the action plan, the Co mmission will develop strategic international 
partnerships  to secure a diversified and sustainable supply of critical raw materials, including 
through undistorted trade and investment conditions, starting with pilot partnerships with 
Canada, interested cou ntries in Africa and the EU’s neighbourhood in 2021. Under the EU -
Ukraine High Level Industrial Dialogue, the Commission is progressing with the strategic 
partnership on raw materials with Ukraine. The Commission also held an initial scoping meeting 
with S erbia.  
From commodity to service.  Many raw materials could be recycled and brought back into 
service. To better link the raw materials with products and customers, there is an opportunity to 
move away from the commodity model to a "Resource as a Service" m odel.  This model could 
link investors, companies, suppliers and end -users. For example, instead of providing lithium as 
a commodity to battery manufactures, a service can guarantee a minimum level of 
electrochemical potential high energy -density rechargea ble batteries. The raw materials will 
remain in the company's custody. They could be recovered after the end of the life of the battery 
for appropriate recycling.  
 
59 
 Transparency and data.  To achieve a more resilient economy, there is a need for efficient 
tracking of raw materials through technology, harmonised data requirements, and policy and 
regulation that carefully incentivise data collection and sharing worldwide. There is a range of 
technologies such as distributed ledgers and satellites that can help to improve traceability, 
transparency, and sustainability of the supply chains. Improved understanding of material flows, 
and data transparency will provide significant benefits, including increased recycling, reduced 
global supply chain vulnerability and reduced price volatility.  
Raw materials from Europe  
Public awareness, acceptance and trust. Sourcing from the EU (actions 5 to 8 of the action 
plan) needs to be accompanied by increased public awareness, acceptance and trust. Concerns of 
local communities  about the degradation of the environment linked to extraction and refining 
projects would need to be addressed. Efforts would need to be undertaken at national, regional 
and local level, and by holding an open and transparent dialogue with local communiti es about 
the importance and benefits of raw materials activities for mitigating climate change and 
preserving biodiversity. In this context, the Commission is launching in 2021 a “ Roundtable on 
Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Raw Materials Mining” , gathering together the 
Commission, public authorities, industry, NGOs and other social  partners.  
Under action 10 of the action plan, the EU promotes responsible mining practices for critical 
raw materials  through the EU regulatory framework and relevant international cooperation.  The 
Commission is developing a set of social, environmental and economic principles for 
sustainable raw materials in the EU . The principles should enable to better communicate wit h 
the public on the conditions at which sustainable raw materials extraction and processing takes 
place in Europe and increase public acceptance for this activity.    
Permitting – a competence of Member States or their regions . While maintaining the highes t 
environmental and social standards, there is a need to further streamline, accelerate and improve 
predictability of the diverse and lengthy planning and permitting procedures, in close 
cooperation with industry and social partners. This should apply in t he first place to (critical) raw 
materials projects of strategic importance (e.g. for achieving climate neutrality and the digital 
agenda).  
  
 
60 
 5.2 Active pharmaceutical ingredients  
Medicinal products are critical for society.  They offer therapeutic options for diagnosis, 
treatment and prevention of diseases and are important to address threats to public health, 
including the COVID -19 and any future pandemic. The New Industrial Strategy for Europe 
(March 2020) stresses that “ access to medical products and pharmaceuticals is crucial to 
Europe’s security and autonomy in today’s world ”. The bottom -up analysis developed in chapter 
2 of this staff working document highlighted that the EU appears to be foreign dependent on a 
number of  inputs and products in the health ecosystem.  
This chapter provides first insights into the EU’s possible dependencies and vulnerabilities 
in the area of active pharmaceutical ingredients. It should be considered together with  the 
analysis and actions in the Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe (November, 2020),106 which 
underlined the importance of access to safe, effective and high -quality medicines at an affordable 
price. The evidence presented in this chapter can notably provide information to the ongoing 
Structured Dialogue on the security of medicines supply launched under the Pharmaceutical 
Strategy, which specifically aims at developing further understanding of causes and drivers of 
potential vulnerabilities and dependencies in the pharmaceutical supply  chain, together with a 
range of relevant actors.107  
a) Context  
The pharmaceutical supply chain has a very complex structure ( Graph 26). Pharmaceuticals 
are composed of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs)108 and excipients109. APIs are 
formulated via chemical synthesis, derived from starting animal sources, extracted from plants 
and herbs or via formation processes or cell culture, fermentation, extraction or isolation. In 
addition to those starting materials110, raw materials111 and intermediates112 are also needed in the 
production process of APIs. This production process is potentially polluting and very energy 
intensive if not properly managed. After an API is produced, it is then formulated into the final 
medicinal product. In many cases, the production process may also include drug delivery 
technologies (e.g. inhalators, injection pens). Once manufactured and formulated, medicinal 
                                                           
106 COM(2020)761 final.  
107 For more details on the Structured Dialogue on the security of medicines: https://ec.europa.eu/heal th/human -
use/strategy/dialogue_medicines -supply_en   
108 Active pharmaceutical ingredient is a substance or mixture of substances intended to be used in the manufacture 
of a drug (medical product) and intended to exert a pharmacological, immunological or meta bolic action with a view 
of restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions or to make a medical diagnosis  
109 Excipients are diverse materials from many origins (animal, vegetable or mineral) and are not exclusive to 
medicines (can be for exampl e also used in food and cosmetics). Excipients can act as fillers or control the pace of 
the release. They are manufactured using traditional chemical or biosynthetic processes.  
110 Any substance from which an active substance is manufactured or extracted.  
111 Any substance, reagent or solvent intended for use in the production of an active substance and from which the 
active substance is not directly manufactured or extracted.  
112 Substances intended for further processing (one or several times). Further process ing can be further molecular 
changes and /or purification and isolation processes until the active substance is of sufficient quality to be used in 
the production of a medicinal product.  
 
61 
 products are packaged and transferred to w holesale distributors and then further distributed to 
hospital pharmacies and other authorised or entitled medicines retailers.  
The pharmaceutical supply chain has in general lower risk exposure than other supply 
chains but remains susceptible to possible disruptions.113 Given the high trade intensity of the 
pharmaceutical supply chain, this sector is particularly sensitive to trade disputes as well as 
cyberattacks given the high level of digitisation, R&D, capital intensity and exposure to digital 
data flows .114 The COVID -19 outbreak has shown that an increased demand for medicines used 
to treat patients as well as uncoordinated stockpiling, together with difficulties in the supply 
chains within and outside of the EU (e.g. closing of sites, export restrictions and disruptions in 
logistics) can result into important disruptions in pharmaceutical supply chains with possible 
risks of medicine shortages in the EU. Furthermore, on -site accidents115, non -compliance with 
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)  as well as tran sport issues are other factors threatening the 
supply and leading to possible important drug shortages.  
Graph 26: Pharmaceutical supply chain  
 
Source: https://www.ey.com/en_us/strategy -transactions/covid -19-risks -and-resiliency -in-the-drug-supply -chain    
Biological medicines are taking up an increasing share in total drug expenditure.  In the past 
decade, the focus of pharmaceutical research has moved from small molecules designed to 
control diseases to biologics.116 In 2018, in Europe over 30% of all healthcare spending was on 
                                                           
113 It is has less exposure to climate -related events (e.g. heat stress  and flooding) or to a pandemic due to its 
relatively high capital intensity  
114 McKinsey Global Institute, Risk resilience and rebalancing in global value chains, 2020. Retrieved from 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business -functions/operations/our -insights/risk -resilience -and-rebalancing -in-global -
value -chains   
115 Explosion in Tianjin (China) in 2015 damaged storehouses and pro duction lines of medicines. This accident led 
to shortages of supplies in the EU.  
116 Biological medicines are derived or manufactured from a living source and work by targeting specific chemicals 
or cells involved in the body’s immune system response.  

 
62 
 biological medi cines of which 1.5% are biosimilars (i.e. biological medicines highly similar to 
the already approved ones).117 The latter is expected to increase in the next five years as a 
number of biologics will fall off patent.  
This review focuses on possible vulnerabi lities and dependencies that manifest upstream, 
during the manufacturing process.  There are also a number of other challenges, notably in the 
procurement and distribution of medicines that have manifested during the COVID -19 outbreak. 
In this context, the Health Union Package proposed by the Commission in November 2020 
strengthens the role of the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in the monitoring of shortages 
and provides for a cooperation framework to confront crisis situations.  
b) Origin of possible vulnerabi lities  
The pharmaceutical supply chain has become one of the most integrated supply chains in 
the world.  Different stages of manufacturing towards a finished dosage form may take place in 
many different countries before the final product reaches the European patient. The supply chain 
of biological medicines is shorter than that of medicines produced in chemi cal synthesis, as such 
biological medicines are produced in final dosage forms (i.e. API production and formulation 
take place in a single location).  
Global production of APIs  
There is regional concentration in generic API production. According to a Chemi cal 
Pharmaceutical Generic Association Report (2015),  the EU accounts for 24% of the world’s 
value of API production. 66% are produced in Asia Pacific (India and China), 3% in North 
America and 7% in the rest of the world. APIs for biological products are not included in these 
statistics.  
China and India are the world’s key producers of generic APIs.  Until mid -2010, India has 
been the world’s top supplier of both APIs and intermediates. It remained self -dependent on 
those materials for both domestic consump tion and export.118 In recent years, China has 
leveraged on its inherent cost advantage, leading to the displacement of part of the 
manufacturing capacity for certain APIs and their advanced intermediates from India to China. 
Today, India fulfils 20% of glob al demand for generic medicines in terms of volume, but it relies 
on Chinese imports for their 70% of APIs by volume. Europe imports 15.4% of Chinese and 
16.4% of Indian API production.119 
In addition, there seems to be a further  increasing trend in the conc entration of generic 
APIs being produced in India and China.120 Looking at new approvals of Certification of 
                                                           
117 IQVIA: The impact of biosimilar competition in Europe, 2019  
118 KPGM: Indian bulk drugs industry – Regaining the lost glory, 2017. Retrieved from http://ciipharma.in/pdf/API -
Report -2017.pdf   
119 Chemica l Pharmaceutical Generic Association (CPA) Report: Competition in the World API markets, 2015  
120 MundiCare (2020) for Progenerica  
 
63 
 suitability of European Pharmacopoeia monographs (CEPs, i.e. API quality certificates121) used 
for medicine approvals between 2000 and 2020, Asia signi ficantly outperformed Europe. Asian 
manufacturers increased the number of their CEPs from 183 to 2,369, while European 
manufacturers only grew from 348 to 1,260 CEPs.  
Data also indicates that there are specialisation patterns whereby certain medicines may no 
longer be produced in the EU due to cost pressures.  A MundiCare Report122 finds that two 
thirds of the currently valid CEPs are held by Asian manufacturers. For 93 out of the 554 APIs 
with valid CEPs considered in the analysis, there is no European produc tion at all. Furthermore, 
for more than half of the APIs that are placed in the EU market, there are only between 1 and 5 
manufacturers being CEP holders.  
Still, European manufacturers maintain their key position as regards specific (high -end) 
APIs with l ow production volumes and complex production processes . According to 
EudraGMDP, Member States with the highest number of registered manufacturing sites are Italy 
(185), France (149), Germany (92), Spain (87) and Poland (84). European APIs producers are 
reputed for the highest quality and maintain an important share in the global market.123 Italy 
followed by Spain are the largest producers of generic APIs in Europe. They both export more 
than 95% of their production.124 Production of APIs in Europe is subject to  the most stringent 
environmental regulations and is well known for its high quality.125 These together with 
relatively high energy prices increase the cost of APIs production in Europe.  
On a global scale, China holds a strong APIs position in antibiotics, antiviral, anti -bacterial 
and anti -inflammatory (pain -relief segment).  India leads in the central nervous system (CNS) 
and respiratory segments. China and India both have strong competitive positions in 
cardiovascular and oncology segments. However, when i t comes to serving highly regulated 
markets, Italian companies keep a strong competitive position in all therapeutic segments with 
the exception of antibiotics and the anti -infective sector.  
Trade data analysis  
An analysis of the EU’s API import volumes using the dependency indicators developed in 
chapter 2.2 points to an important level of concentration of extra -EU imports coming from 
a limited number of third countries. Applying the indicators developed in chap ter 2.2.1 to the 
                                                           
121 Proof of the quality of active pharmaceutical ingredients, used for drug approvals. It should be noted that CEPs 
are not mand atory and there are API manufacturers that do not have a CEP but are still authorized and selling their 
APIs.  
122 MundiCare (2020) for Progenerica  
123 One third of US finished dosage forms of APIs comes from Europe according to the 2019 FDA Shortages 
Report, retrieved from www.fda.gov/drugs/ drug-shortages/report -drug-shortages -root-causes -and-potential -solutions   
124 Italy exports almost all of its production to the most regulated markets: 25.5% to Europe, 49.7% to North 
America and 15.3% to Japan  
125 Good manufacturing practice  (GMP ) describes t he minimum standard that a medicines manufacturer must meet 
in their production processes to assure consistent  quality for the final product. Independently of the GMP 
requirements, the environmental legislation applies to the API manufacturing plants.  
 
64 
 extra -EU import volumes126 of APIs127 provides insights into the EU’s possible dependencies in 
the area of APIs. The results show an average concentration of the EU’s import volumes  of 
around 0.4, indicating that most imports come from only a few sources. In fact, around 80% of 
the EU’s total extra -EU import volume in APIs originates in five countries – China, US, United 
Kingdom, Indonesia, India – with China providing around 45% of the total extra -EU volume. 
Total extra -EU import volumes accou nt for 53% of the EU’s total import value of APIs, while a 
large part of the EU’s total import volume of API originates in the EU (47%).  
In addition, while data shows that the EU has capacity to produce APIs, there are 
important price differences between imports and exports. The indicator (also developed in 
chapter 2.2.1) on the substitutability of the extra -EU import volume of APIs with EU production 
(proxied by the total export volume of APIs), is characterised by an average of 1. This suggests 
that the volume of extra EU imports is equal to the volume of total EU exports of APIs. At the 
same time, in order to understand whether the EU produces the same types of products as the 
ones imported, the price differences between the imports and exports of APIs c an provide an 
indication (see chapter 2.4). These show important differences in the average price between 
imports and exports.128 Thus, in the event of a trade disruption, while the EU might have 
capacity to produce some APIs, the fact that it produces at a different price should be taken into 
account.   
Looking at the extra -EU APIs imports in values provides complementary information to 
analyse foreign dependencies and shows that the EU is dependent on different third 
countries. The analysis of extra -EU impor t values  of APIs allows to consider trade in high value 
and innovative products. Applying the dependency indicators to the EU’s import values of APIs 
shows an average concentration of around 0.5, suggesting that most APIs import values originate 
in a few s ources. However, these main sources of imports are different with around 80% of the 
total extra -EU import value of APIs coming from four countries – Switzerland, US, Singapore 
and China – with Switzerland and the US at the top, each of them supplying the E U with around 
30% of the total import value. Moreover, extra -EU import values account for less than half of 
total EU import value of APIs.  
Firm level data  
Examining linkages between firms along the supply chain can shed further light on 
potential dependen cies. Pharmaceutical companies can produce APIs themselves or they can 
enter into business relationships with Contract Manufacturing Organizations (CMOs). CMO 
                                                           
126 Pharmaceuticals can be divided into two distinct groups: high value innovative/branded medicines (patent 
protected) and generic medicines. Generic medicines are traded at a significantly lower price than innovative ones. 
Analysing trade flows in values gi ves a greater weight to trade in innovative medicines, creating a bias towards 
them. For this reason, analysing trade volumes provides a clearer illustration. At the same time, looking at trade in 
volumes gives a higher weight to blockbuster drugs that are  traded in high volumes.  
127 For the purpose of this analysis, API products are identified following the methodology put forward in CEIPE 
(2020) Key Trade Data Points on the EU Pharmaceutical Supply Chain retrieved from 
https://www.efpia.eu/media/554792/key -trade -data-points -on-the-eu27 -pharmaceutical -supply -chain.pdf   
128 The average price difference for APIs is 1, suggesting that on average the price of extra -EU imports for APIs is 
100% more different compared to the price of total exports (i.e. intra - and extra -EU exports).  
 
65 
 activities cover both APIs used for production of small molecules and biological medicines. 
Sourc ing from CMOs allows optimising resource utilisation and managing costs, as well as 
ensuring supply continuity in case of disturbances in in -house production. CMOs can also take 
responsibility for the whole production process up to formulation. For these r easons, they have 
become an indispensable part in the production of vaccines as many developers (including big 
pharma companies) while being able to establish in -house manufacturing for products in an 
investigational phase, do not have sufficient capacitie s to deploy large scale production.129 
Table 1: Number of CMOs, by geographical location of headquarters (2019)  
Country ISO  All 
CMO  Biologics 
CMO  CMO supplying EU 
companies  CMO with  
EU GMP (*)  
CN 102 (23) 4 (0) 12 36 
IN 90 (56) 1 (0) 14 43 
KR 40 (12) 13 (3) 5 10 
EU 32 (3) 8 (1) 22 2* 
US 31 (9) 9 (4) 17 5 
TW 28 (14) 3 (2)  5 2 
JP 19 (3) 2 (1) 4 7 
CH 7 (5) 0 5 5 
GB 6 (1) 1 (0) 4 1 
Other  23 (11) 1 (1) 5 5 
Total  378 (137)  43 (14) 93 116 
Source: Based on FactSet and EudraGMP database  
Notes: (*) Only sites located in third countries are considered.  
There are 378 firms that can be classified as CMOs in the firm -level database FactSet130, 
the majority of which are located in China or India.  This sample includes biopharmaceutical 
conglomerates such as Pfizer or Merck, as well as specialized companies such as Zhejiang 
Huahai Pharmaceutical or Samsung BioLogics. Table 1 provides an overview of the 
geographical locations of the headquarters of t hese companies. Half of them are based in China 
and India, with China ranking first. However, when specialised firms are considered131, India is 
in the lead with 56. Only three EU based firms specialise in Contract Manufacturing services. 
This confirms the l eading role of China and India in the production of APIs.132  
                                                           
129 Roots analysis (2019) Vaccine Contract Manufacturing Market (2nd Edition), 2019 -2030  
130 See Box in the Annex for details on this data source. The data relies on FactSet’s Revere Business Industry 
Classification System (RBICS) classification and includes companies that produce intermediate and active 
ingredient including large molecules of small compounds including biological  products (antibodies, proteins or 
generic material) used in the production of biological medicines.  
131 A firm is considered specialized , if it derives more than two thirds of its revenues from Contract Manufacturing 
services.  
132 The main limitation of FactS et data is that it covers mostly listed and larger companies. As a result, the coverage 
of SMEs is not thorough enough to ensure that the scale of production in the EU is appropriately reflected, since 
 
 
66 
 When it comes to biological products, other countries appear to play an important role . The 
second column in Table 1 shows the number of CMOs supplying biological products. The 
number of companies  is smaller as this part of industry is still relatively young. Here developed 
countries are taking the lead, including South Korea, EU Member States and the US.  
Looking specifically at CMOs with a European GMP certificate again appears to confirm 
the imp ortant role of China and India as suppliers to Europe.  The third column shows the 
number of CMOs that supply to EU based pharmaceutical companies. It is important to note, that 
while only a few companies located in China and India are supplying EU -based ph armaceutical 
companies it could be that the FactSet data does not capture all links between companies. For 
this reason, the last column checks how many of FactSet CMOs have a European GMP 
certificate confirming that these are smaller than the actual number  of CMOs and highlighting 
again the important role of China and India.  
Graph 27: Supplying structure of major EU -based CMOs (2019)  
 
Source: Based on FactSet database.  
Note: Blue and red circles denote, respectively, EU - and non  EU-based companies. Customers are identified by 
their name in large blue case, while suppliers are identified by their name in small dark case. The size of the 
circles is proportional to the company’s supplier outdegree (i.e., the number of different comp anies that it 
supplies). Darker connecting arrows denote a stronger relation between the two companies concerned (measured 
as the total number of links between them).  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
many API producers in Europe tend to be SMEs. Still, t he data indicates that CMOs in China and India have large 
scale production when compared to European counterparts.  

 
67 
 It appears that EU companies rely on both EU and extra EU based suppliers ( Graph 27). 
EU customers have bilaterally specific suppliers that are not connected to one another. However, 
EU companies have some suppliers in common that also tend to be supplier with high outdegree 
(i.e., relevant for the industry globally and not just at the EU level). At the same time, it is not 
fully clear based on the available data sources to what extent the EU relies on critical capacities 
in extra -EU countries and firms in the different steps in the manufacturing process of APIs.  
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
The elements of information presented in this review are a starting point for a broader 
assessment of the EU’s potential vulnerabilities and dependencies  in pharmaceutical supply 
chains.  The EU has a strong production capacity and it is not sufficiently clear to what extent the 
EU relies on capacities in extra EU countries across the different steps and inputs required for the 
manufacturing of APIs. These steps are not sufficiently identifiable in available data sources. 
Furthermore, there is no pre -established list in the EU of essential APIs that would allow to 
narrow the assessment to a specific set of critical medicines.133 It is essential to determine cr itical 
products, relevant from the point of view of public health, for which the EU does not have 
sufficient capacity to produce. In this respect, further analysis would be needed to provide 
evidence on:  
 Which specific APIs, other key ingredients or techno logies are critical?  
 What is the share of medicinal products placed on the EU market relying on key 
ingredients imported from a limited number of extra EU countries?  
 How many companies (in the EU and globally) rely on the same sources of supply? How 
does this affect resilience (at company, EU and global level)?  
 Which specific APIs, other key ingredients or technologies are of concern?  
Having a better understanding of  vulnerabilities and potential dependencies in a first phase 
will serve to put forward, in a second phase, a set of possible measures to strengthen the 
resilience of pharmaceutical supply chains and ensure the security of supply of medicines 
to patients in  Europe.  As announced in the Pharmaceutical Strategy for Europe, the European 
Commission has initiated and will steer a structured dialogue initiative with and between 
relevant public and private actors of the pharmaceutical supply chain. The structured di alogue 
will first focus on identifying the causes and drivers of potential vulnerabilities, including 
dependencies in the often global and complex supply chains of critical medicines, their raw 
materials, APIs and intermediates. In the second phase, after closing knowledge gaps and gaining 
a better understanding of the current situation, the Commission will consider possible solutions 
to address issues identified.  
  
                                                           
133 The WHO publishes a list of Essential Medicines containing the medications considered to be most effective and 
safe to meet the most import ant needs in a health system: https://list.essentialmeds.org/   
 
68 
 5.3 Li-ion batteries  
Technologies and products related to batteries are key to enable the EU’s green and digital 
transformation, notably also in the area of mobility.  They are at the heart of the European 
Green Deal that sets the ambition for the EU to ‘become climate neutral by 2050’ and ‘help 
companies become world leaders in clean products and te chnologies’.  
This review looks more in detail at the EU’s dependencies and possible vulnerabilities in 
the strategic area of batteries as well as relevant ongoing actions to address them. Industrial 
Alliances, where proved well targeted, justified and effi cient, emerged as an important tool that 
can be used in some specific sectors following the experience of the European Battery Alliance 
launched in 2017 to help address the lack of battery manufacturing capacity in the EU.  
a) Context and possible weaknesses i n the EU  
In 2018, the EU only had about 3% of the global production capacity of Lithium -ion (Li -
ion) battery cells, while China had about 66% and South Korea together with Japan and 
other Asian countries about 20%.134,135 While EU demand was also limited, in the short and 
mid-term reliance on imported cells or batteries could have made it more difficult for EU 
industry (including automotive original equipment manufacturers) to obtain tailor -made cells and 
ensure security o f supply. Other risks that were raised include increased costs of transportation, 
loss of part of the value, time delays, relinquished control on quality and limitations on design 
options.136 The supply of some relevant raw and processed materials were also identified as high 
risk, while a medium level of risk was anticipated for the supply of some components. Due to 
some of these considerations, the development of a European value chain for Li -ion cells was 
identified as priority through the Commission’s Str ategic Action Plan for Batteries.137 
While there are different battery technologies, Li -ion is a key component in a range of 
chemistries largely due to its superior performance (e.g. as regards energy and power 
densities) compared to various well -established  and mature battery technologies.  The 
energy density of Li -ion batteries has increased significantly in recent years (by more than 300% 
since their commercialisation in 1991138). In addition, there is further potential for optimisation 
with the new generatio n of Li -ion batteries.139 An additional important enabler of the Li -ion 
battery technology’s significant market share growth is the rapid decrease of their cost in recent 
years from over USD 1100/kWh (Kilowatt Hour) in 2010 to USD 156/kWh in 2019.134,138 By 
                                                           
134 Tsiropoulos I., Tarvydas D., Lebedeva N. (JRC Science for Policy report and references therein): Li -ion batteries 
for mobility and stationary s torage applications. Scenarios for costs and market growth, 2018  
135 Report on progress of clean energy competitiveness, COM(2020)953  
136 SET ‐Plan key action n°7, Declaration of Intent and Implementation Plan, available at:  
https://setis.ec.europa.eu/implementing -integrated -set-plan/batteries -e-mobility -and-stationary -storage -ongoing -
work  
137 https://eur -lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:0e8b694e -59b5 -11e8 -ab41 -
01aa75ed71a1.0003.02/DOC_3&format=PDF   
138 L. Trahey,  et al: Energy storage emerging: A perspe ctive from the Joint Center for Energy Storage Research, 
2020  
139 Lebedeva, N., Ruiz Ruiz, V., Bielewski, M., Blagoeva, D., Pilenga, A. (European Commission): Selected 
Advanced Lithium -ion, Post Lithium -ion and Non -Lithium -Ion Batteries Technology Developmen t Report, 2020  
 
69 
 2023, some forecasts suggest that average prices will be close to USD 100 /kWh.140 The USD 
100/kWh point has traditionally been seen as the point at which, for mobility, electric cars 
become competitive with their internal combustion engine equivalent.  
Access to relevant raw materials is a key element when considering dependencies  and 
possible vulnerabilities in the Li -ion battery supply chain. Among the raw materials used in 
battery manufacturing, cobalt, natural graphite, lithium, fluorspar and phosphorous are in the 
2020 list of critical raw materials. There is also research loo king at silicon metal, titanium and 
niobium (also critical raw materials) to improve energy density, durability and safety in future 
Li-ion battery types. OEMs, cell manufacturers and suppliers will likely compete globally with 
each other to secure their b attery supply chains and access to the five essential battery raw 
materials (lithium, cobalt, nickel, graphite and manganese).  
In addition, value chains of other materials (in particular rare earths for high -energy 
density permanent magnets) are key to pro ducing electric motors with the highest power 
densities.  In some cases, access to these raw materials may be at risk (for example due to 
political instability or export restrictions), or challenged by the prevalent use of unethical and 
unsustainable mining  practices. For these reasons, access to raw materials was identified as one 
of the six priority areas in the Strategic Action Plan for Batteries141 and subsequently in 2020 
when the European Raw Materials Alliance was launched.  
b) Origin of vulnerabilities and  recent progress made  
The EU is a major world market for electrical vehicles and consequently also for batteries.  
The battery represents a significant share of the total cost of an electric vehicle. Furthermore, 
batteries are also increasingly used for ene rgy storage and in other industrial applications 
(machinery, power tools, forklifts, etc.).  
Graph 28: The worldwide battery market  
 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Pillot C., “The rechargeable battery market and main trends 2018 -
2030”, Avicenne Energy, presentation at AABC Europe 2020, 13 -16 January 2020, Wiesbaden, Germany.   
                                                           
140 Source: Bloomberg  
141 COM(2018)293  

 
70 
 At present the Li -ion battery technology dominates the rechargeable battery market in value 
(Graph 28). With a compound annual growth rate over 15%, it is expected to break -even, also in 
volume, with well -established and mature battery technologies (such as lead -acid) in the near 
future.142 Driven by a rapidly growing demand in batteries for electric vehicles, Li -ion batteries’ 
global demand is projected to increase from about 90 Gigawatt hours (GWh) in 2016 to up to ca. 
800 GWh by 2025, exceed 2 000 GWh by 2030, and possibly reach up to 4 000 GW h by 2040 
under the most optimistic scenario.134,135 In Europe, demand is  expected to be around 400 GWh 
by 2028.143 
As a result, future needs for raw materials are very significant, while the EU holds only a 
very limited level of production.  Graph 29 shows the key players in the Li -ion cell supply chain 
in relation to global production. For batteries used in mobility and energy storage alone, the EU 
will need, compared to the current supply to the whole EU economy, 7 -18 times mo re lithium 
and 2 -5 times more cobalt in 2030, and almost 16 -57 times more lithium and 3 -15 times more 
cobalt in 2050.145,144 At the same time, the EU produces just 1% of all battery raw materials. 
These volumes cannot satisfy now the European demand for Li -ion batteries.  
Graph 29: Li-ion batteries – an overview of supply risks, bottlenecks and key players 
along the supply chain  
 
Source: European Commission, JRC145   
Also when it comes to processed materials and components, Asia delivers 84% while the 
EU again has only a relatively small share (around 8 -9%).  Furthermore, the low level of 
processed materials and components delivered by other countries (beyond China and Japan) 
                                                           
142 Pillot C.: The rechargeable battery market and main trends 2018 -2030 (Avicenne Energy, presentation at AABC 
Europe 2020, 13 -16 January 2020, Wiesbaden, Germany)  
143 COM(2019)176  
144 Cobalt: demand -supply balances in the transition to electric mobility 
(https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC112285/jrc112285_cobalt.pdf)   
145 European Commission: Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 
2020. Figures refer to the range between the low and the high demand scenario.  

 
71 
 provides ver y little margin for supply diversification. Finally, regarding battery cells themselves 
a similar high level of dependence on foreign imports (notably from China) was also identified.  
Recent investments in the EU  
As a response to these identified vulnerabilities, public and private investments have been 
mobilised at scale over recent years, in particular through the European Battery Alliance. 
These are expected to lead to a significant increase of Europe’s lithium demand being supplied 
from European Union sources by 2025. The ambition of the European Commission and the 
European Battery Alliance is to have 15 gigafactories in Europe offering enough battery cells by 
2025 to power six million electric cars (around 360 GWh).146 Based on the Transport & 
Environment (T&E) monitoring of current battery production intentions, the EU could be around 
100 GWh above this target if the planned gigafactories come on schedule.   
Developers of next generation Li -ion battery technologi es play a major role in generating 
new investments in the EU. These innovators have managed to attract considerable levels of 
early and late stage venture capital (VC) investments as new technology developments emerged. 
About half of these are raised by US  based companies, with the EU attracting around 40 %. EU 
investments are mostly in Northvolt. While the majority of investors in EU projects are from the 
within the EU, they also include actors from the US, China, South Korea, the UK and 
Switzerland147,148. The size of VC investments in Northvolt over the past 3 years is comparable 
to the investments in US start -ups of comparable scope since 2013.  
Firm level data analysis  
Looking at the currently established battery manufacturing companies in the EU, the p re-
eminence of Asian -based companies is quite important. Graph 30 shows the supply structure 
of the major manufacturers in the EU of heavy -duty and high -end batteries. Most manufacturers 
display specific links with suppliers, with a limited number of suppliers simultaneously 
supplying several battery producers. Among those, there are Japanese and Korean firms, 
although the vast majority are Chinese compan ies (as highlighted in the circled areas of the 
figure) which, considered collectively, seem to play a central role in the supplying structure of 
the industry.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
146 See https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/api/files/document/print/en/speech_20_2202/SPEECH_20_2202_EN.pdf ; 
https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/2021_02_Battery_raw_materials_report_final.pdf  
147 ICF (commissioned by European Commission): Climate neutral market opportunities and EU competitiv eness 
study, Draft  
148 Commission elaboration of Pitchbook data  
 
72 
 Graph 30: Supplying structure of major manufacturers of high -end a nd heavy -duty 
batteries  
 
Source: Commission analysis based on FactSet supply chain data  
Notes: Each circle represents an individual company. Circles are coloured according to the country of the firm’s headquarters : EU (blue), 
China (red), US (yellow),  Japan and Korea (green), Taiwan (pink), rest of the world (grey). For easier readability, the names of the suppliers 
are omitted, only the customers are named in the colour of their country of origin.  The size of the circles is proportional to the company ’s 
supplier outdegree (i.e., the number of different companies that it supplies). Darker connecting arrows denote a stronger rel ation between the 
two companies concerned (measured as the total number of links between them).  
Role of Research and Innovation  
Maintaining the leading edge in the quickly growing and competitive sector of batteries 
requires constant technological improvements and, hence, significant R&I effort. Research 
and innovation plays a key role in the area of batteries, with large ongoing efforts worldwide.  A 
broad range of applications requires a variety of fit -for-purpose batteries, stimulating 
development of new types of batteries.138,149 A large effort worldwide is directed towards 
research and development for various advanced Li -ion as well as post -Li and non -Li-ion battery 
                                                           
149 Y.E. Durmus, et al: Side by Side Battery Technologies with Lithium ‐Ion Based Batteries, 2020  

 
73 
 technologies.138,139,150 For example, the evolution of peer reviewed scientific publications in the 
area of transport electrification in recent years shows an increase on ‘battery capacity’. China 
and the US are leading the research on this field with Germany in third place and France also 
making the top 10 from the EU ( Graph 31). 
Graph 31: Number of documents on battery capacity in the period 2010 -2019 (left) and 
country of origin (right)  
 
Source: European Commission, JRC based on Scopus151 
Generally, Asian regions lead in battery research and innovation . This is the case concerning 
both contemporary Li -ion as well as advanced Li -ion such as ASSB, post -Li-ion such as Li -S 
and non -Li-ion (i.e. Na -ion and RedOx flow batteries139). 
At the same time, there is a considerable effort in R&I by EU industry . Batteries and e -
mobility receive the highest share (over a fifth) of pri vate R&I investments in the Energy Union 
R&I priorities. Even though the EU ranks third in high -value patents among major economies, 
quite a way behind Japan and Korea, it does display specialisation in this topic – meaning that it 
has a larger share of pa tents in this field than the world average152 and thus an increased focus of 
efforts. European research helped gaining a deep insight into fundamental aspects of advanced 
battery technologies (e.g. underlying reaction mechanisms, materials properties, interf acial 
processes, battery components safety, etc. as well as associated limitations).  
Batteries for electric vehicles is a research area currently attracting a number of projects 
with significant EU funding . Improving the driving range of electric vehicles  (EV) is a key 
research theme. The combination of the Horizon2020 programme and the preceding Seventh 
Framework Programme (FP7) contributed over EUR 310 million with support to research and 
innovation activities. Actions under road transport electrificatio n include support for local 
production of batteries and components as well as the development of electro -chemical systems 
for future high energy density electric batteries.  
Despite this progress in EU R& I efforts, it is key to ensure a systematic implementation of 
their results. Evidence shows that R&I results may not have been fully and systematically 
                                                           
150 ICF (commissioned by EC): Climate neutral market opportunities and EU competitiveness study, Draft  
151 www.scopus.com   
152 JRC SETIS research and innovation data https://setis.ec.europa.eu/publications/setis -research -innovation -data  
0 500 1000 1500 2000FranceAustraliaIndiaCanadaUnited KingdomJapanSouth KoreaGermanyUnited StatesChina
Number of documentsCountry or territory
 
74 
 implemented by the European battery sector, which raises concerns related to the potential loss 
of Europ e's knowledge base.136,139 For example, a nalysis153 of EC -funded projects (FP7, 
Horizon2020) on developments and future needs within the scope of the Transport electrification 
STRIA roadmap154 including batteries and energy management systems, shows lithium -ion 
batteries with novel anode/cathode mate rials to have an overall low level of maturity.  
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
Recognising the need and urgency for the EU to develop a battery value chain, the 
Commission launched the European Battery Alliance (EBA) in 2017155 and adopted the 
Strategic Action Plan on Batteries (2018) . Both have acted as a catalyst for major investments 
all along the battery value chain and already delivered some significant results. The amount of 
investment across the electro -mobility value chain in Europe, in 2 019 alone, reached €60 billion, 
which was 3.5 times that of China156. The vast majority of this is private investments, including 
investments from third country companies.  This has been invested into many projects across the 
value chain including 15 new  battery cell plants being built across Europe. These plants will 
provide by 2025 enough cells to power at least 6 million electric vehicles.  
As a result, while production of batteries for electrification in transport has so far been 
dominated by companies in East Asia, notably Chinese companies, Europe may  become the 
second (after China) manufacturer of the lithium -ion cells (batteries) by 2024.  Compared to 
5.9% in 2019, Europe’s share in the global Li -ion battery production capacity may increase to 
14.7% by 2024 and to 16.6% by 2029.  
Actions have also been put in place to strengthen R&I efforts. The technology and innovation 
platform of EBA – Batteries Europe157 – drives  the implementation of battery -related research 
and innovation actions of the Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan136 and the Strategic 
Transport Research and Innovation Agenda158 and is tasked with coordination of R&I efforts at 
regional, national and European levels. A range of measures have been put in place, including 
strengthening Horizon 2020 with additional funding for battery research;  and preparing specific 
instruments for Horizon Europe, such as for example the European Partnership for an Industrial 
Battery Value Chain159 with a proposed budget of EUR 925M, including a long term research 
                                                           
153 Tsakalidis, A., van Balen, M., Gkoumas, K., Marques dos Santos, F., Grosso, M., Ortega Hortelano, A., and 
Pekár, F.:  Research and innovation in transport  electrification in Europe: An assessment based on the Transport 
Research and Innovation Monitoring and Information System (TRIMIS) , 2020   
154 Strategic Transport Research and Innovation Agenda https://trimis.ec.europa.eu/stria -roadmaps/transport -
electrification   
155 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/policy/european -battery -alliance_en  Following discussions with Member 
States and industry, a report on the implementation of the EBA was adopted by the Commission in 2019 
(https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2019:176:FIN ) 
156 InnoEnergy  
157 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/technology -and-innovation/batteries -europe/ about -platform_en#governance  
158 https://ec.europa.eu/info/research -and-innovation/research -area/transport/stria_en ; 
https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/swd20170223 -
transportresearchandinnovationtomobilitypackage.pdf  
159 https://ec.europa.eu/info/horizon -europe -next-research -and-innovation -framework -programme/european -
partnerships -horiz on-europe/candidates -climate -energy -and-mobility_en  
 
75 
 initiative on future battery technologies,160 and c ontinuing support to projects through EIT 
InnoEnergy161. 
There are 5 main ongoing measures that will be a high priority in the short -term to secure 
the remaining objectives of the Battery Alliance .  
- New legislative framework for batteries.  On 10 December 2020 the Commission adopted its 
proposal to ensure that there are robust sustainability, safety and performance requirements 
for all batteries placed on the EU market. This proposal is being discussed with the European 
Parliament and Counci l with the aim of it coming into force in 2022. This also provides legal 
and regulatory certainty for investments;  
- Important Project of Common European Interest (IPCEI). This State aid instrument has 
proved to be a key tool to unlock substantial private se ctor investment in the battery value 
chain that would not have happened without the approved Member State support. In 
December 2019, the Commission authorised State aid for the first battery IPCEI which 
involves 17 companies spread over 7 Member States and  a range of innovative projects all 
along the value chain. The IPCEI decision authorised the granting of up to EUR 3.2 billion in 
state aid and this is expected to leverage a further EUR 5 billion in private sector 
investments162. State aid for a second IPCE I has just been approved by the Commission. This 
IPCEI involves 42 direct participants with activities in 12 Member States163. The 
Commission’s decision authorised the granting of up to EUR 2.9 billion in State aid with a 
further EUR 9 billion expected in pr ivate sector investments. Both will be critical in 
delivering beyond state -of-the-art innovation across the batteries value chain in the EU and 
the Commission will be involved in the governance of both IPCEIs to monitor progress and 
ensure the original obj ectives are delivered;  
- Strengthening the resilience of the EU critical raw materials value chains. In September 
2020, the Commission launched the Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials to secure the 
European Union's sustainable supply of critical raw materi als as well as the European Raw 
Materials Alliance. Both initiatives will be high priorities in the coming years, with significant 
importance for the EU battery sector;  
- Ensuring effective implementation of Horizon Europe funding of battery research ; Under 
Horizon Europe, all battery -related research activities will be implemented through a co -
programmed partnership set up between the Commission and an association bringing together 
industrial and research stakeholders from across Europe. This partnership (la belled Batt4Eu) 
will receive up to €925M of EU funding, to be implemented through annual calls and with the 
aim of addressing the research and innovation goals set out in a Strategic Research and 
Innovation Agenda (SRIA) jointly drafted and agreed between all partners. The ring -fenced 
budget and SRIA create stability and predictability for the sector, thus de -risking speculative 
research activities and creating a pathway towards bringing innovations to the market. The 
                                                           
160 https://battery2030.eu/  
161 https://investmentround.innoenergy.com/  
162 Press release IP/19/6705 , “State aid: Commission approves €3.2 billion public support by seven Member States 
for a pan -European research and innovation project in all segments of the battery value chain”, December  9, 2019.  
163 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_226   
 
76 
 progress and effectiveness of Batt4EU w ill be centrally monitored through annual reporting 
on mutually agreed KPI’s, and its partnership board (composed of Association and EU 
delegates) is in charge of strategic orientation and technical coordination; and  
- Developing a European skilled battery w orkforce164. In order to ensure that the battery sector 
has access to an appropriately skilled workforce to support its growth, the Commission has 
funded a 4 year Erasmus + project (ALBATTS) to develop a strategy to identify the skills 
needed for the sector and to develop training courses and related initiatives to meet the 
challenge. This compliments the Erasmus+ project DRIVES looking at the skill needs for the 
automotive sector as a whole (due to be completed by the end of 2021) and the recently 
launched i ndustry -led Automotive Skills Alliance165 supported under the Commission’s Pact 
for Skills initiative (expected to be operational by the end of 2021 on the back of pilot 
regional skill programmes planned for 2021).  
The Commission will continue to pursue the  implementation of the Strategic Action Plan on 
Batteries, especially in the areas mentioned above and to further promote additional investments 
in the full value chain. The Action Plan is also complementary to other policies to support the 
Green Deal ambi tions of the Commission including the ongoing review of the CO2 standards for 
vehicles (cars/vans/trucks) that will impact directly on the demand for batteries.  
  
                                                           
164 In the labour market, although some traditional jobs will be lost, the development of the battery production could 
create a positive effect. The Impact Assessment for the battery legislation estimated that 1 GWh creates between 
100-150 direct jobs and 100  - 500 indirect jobs. This would translate to 60,000 – 90,000 direct jobs and 60,000 – 
300,000 indirect ones.  
165 https://automotive -skills -alliance.eu/   
 
77 
 5.4 Hydrogen  
a) Context and possible weaknesses in the EU   
The importance of hydrogen builds on its attributes and it has a wide range of applications 
across ecosystems.  Hydrogen is the most abundant and lightest of the elements, having at the 
same time odourless and nontoxic characteristics. In addition, it has a high energy content per 
unit mass an d it can be readily produced at an industrial scale. Hydrogen is not found free in 
nature and must be “extracted” from diverse sources such as fossil energy, renewable energy, 
nuclear energy and the electrolysis of water. Consequently, a separate energy so urce (electricity, 
heat or light) is required to “produce” (extract or reform) the hydrogen. It can be transported as a 
gas by pipelines or in liquid form by ships, similar to liquefied natural gas (LNG). Hydrogen use 
today is dominated by the chemical and  refining industries but it has applications in various 
ecosystems of the economy including mobility, renewables, electronics, construction, energy 
intensive industries, defence or agrifood. It is used in applications in the metal production and 
fabricatio n, methanol production, food processing and electronics sectors.  
Renewable or low -carbon hydrogen166 can be used much more widely than its current 
applications and it can help to tackle critical challenges related to the decarbonisation and 
competitiveness of the industry.  Renewable and low -carbon hydrogen production and related 
technologies and goods such as ammonia offer ways to decarbonise a range of sectors, including 
long-haul transport, chemicals and iron and steel, where it has been challenging to mea ningfully 
reduce emissions. In this regard, renewable and low -carbon hydrogen production and related 
technologies are key enablers for the decarbonisation of EU energy, industries and mobility as 
they can replace or decarbonise fossil fuels. Hydrogen is al so an option for storing renewable 
energy for long periods and in large quantities, and it is relatively inexpensive to deliver by 
pipelines, making it an enabler for significant expansion of the renewables capacities in the EU. 
The importance of hydrogen is therefore twofold as it fosters the decarbonisation of the economy 
but also the competitiveness of manufacturing industries, provided that renewable and low -
carbon hydrogen can be sustainably offered at competitive prices. The EU’s consumption of 
hydrog en today is around 10 Mt, and it is primarily produced on the basis of natural gas. 
Virtually all of the EU’s hydrogen consumption is currently produced within the EU.  
While current production of hydrogen mainly relies on the use of fossil fuels, there is a 
need to move to renewable and low -carbon hydrogen.  Around 70 Mt of hydrogen are 
currently being produced globally. More than 70% of the hydrogen produced worldwide is 
produced by the steam reforming of methane or natural gas, which is currently the cheap est 
source. The remaining hydrogen is generated by gasification of coal, oil reforming or 
electrolysis. While electrolysis currently accounts for only 0.1% of global hydrogen 
production,167 there is significant scope for this technology to provide more renew able hydrogen.  
                                                           
166 Renewable hydrogen refers to hydrogen produced by electrolysis based on renewable power; low -carbon 
hydrogen encompasses fossil -based hydrogen with carbon capture and electricity -based hydrogen, with significantly 
reduced full life -cycle greenhouse gas emissions compared to existing hydrogen production . 
167 IEA: The Future of Hydrogen, 2019 https://www.iea.org/reports/the -future -of-hydrogen   
 
78 
 The EU is a technology leader in several clean hydrogen technologies, but it depends on 
imports of raw materials for key components (such as electrolysers and fuel cells) as well as 
the supply of renewable energy . Critical raw materials, esp ecially platinum group metals and 
liquid electrolytes,  are used for their catalysts. Therefore, general risks associated with the supply 
of raw materials (see chapter 5.1) also apply to the supply chain of hydrogen. In addition, given 
that renewable energy  is the source for renewable hydrogen production, the supply of abundant 
and affordable renewable energy is a constraint for the development of clean hydrogen 
applications. The Hydrogen strategy for a climate -neutral Europe estimates that it will be 
necess ary to connect 80 -120 GW of solar and wind energy production capacity to the 
electrolysers to provide the necessary electricity. Furthermore, risks associated with raw 
materials used in other renewable technologies could also have an impact on the deployme nt of 
these hydrogen technologies.  
Systemic risks arise from the need of some sectors (e.g. industrial hydrogen users and the 
mobility sector) to have large and reliable supply available.  Given these needs, lack of 
renewable and low -carbon hydrogen supply  in the short term and lack of infrastructure are 
considered as important risks that delay investment decisions.  
b) Origin of vulnerabilities  
As of today, Europe is a global leader of electrolysis technologies , from components supply to 
final integration ca pabilities. Roughly half of electrolyser manufacturers are in Europe, including 
most of the larger ones.168 Europe has particular strengths in key components of fuel cells for 
transport applications, such as catalysts, membrane electrode assemblies (MEA), bi polar plates 
and gas diffusion layers. Many companies also offer hydrogen handling solutions and hydrogen 
refuelling stations.169 
Nevertheless, there are some technology and regulatory gaps linked to green hydrogen 
production.  For example, vulnerabilities in electrolysers mostly relate to manufacturing scale -up 
and supply chain optimisation; large -scale manufacturing capacity is not yet built for most 
producers. The high -pressure hydrogen storage is one of the existing solution s for on -board 
transport applications. However, Europe lacks in production of high -quality carbon fibre, an 
important material used in the manufacture of compressed hydrogen tanks, which is mainly 
imported from Asia.  
The Commission has established targets for 6 GW renewable electrolyser capacity by 2024 
and 40 GW renewable electrolyser capacity by 2030, compared to less than 1 GW in 2020. 
This massive scale up of renewable hydrogen production will require the access to abundant and 
affordable renewable elec tricity, large -scale manufacturing of electrolysers and relevant 
components and materials.  
                                                           
168 E4tech (UK) Ltd for FCH 2 JU in partnership with Ecorys and Strategic Analysis Inc.: Study on val ue chain and 
manufacturing competitiveness analysis for hydrogen and fuel cells technologies (FCH contract 192, Evidence 
report), 2019 – SWOT analysis, p. 114  
169 E4tech: Study on value chain and manufacturing competitiveness analysis for hydrogen and fuel c ells 
technologies (Summary report), 2019  
 
79 
 Graph 32: Relevant raw materials used in fuel cells  
 
Source: European Commission, Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight 
study, 2020  
Around 30 raw materials are needed for producing fuel cells, electrolysers and hydrogen 
storage technologies.  Of these materials, 13 materials are deemed critical for the EU economy 
according to the 2020 CRM lis t. Most of the critical raw materials are in the catalysts, with 
platinum representing around half of the cost of a fuel cell stack. South Africa is the main 
producer of platinum in the world, followed by Russia and Zimbabwe. While currently the EU 
still h as a relatively small production of fuel cells and electrolysers, risks related to the specific 
raw materials will become more apparent if large -scale manufacturing is to be developed in the 
EU.  
Graph 33: Fuel cells and Hydrogen t echnologies: an overview of supply risks, bottlenecks 
and key players along the supply chain  
 
Source: European Commission, Critical materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the EU - a foresight study, 
2020  

 
80 
 Europe is a major supplier of processed materials for fuel cells (40%), followed by the 
United States (28%), China (10%) and Japan (7%).  At the same time, for four particular 
materials (CFCs, polymers (PFSA, perfluorosulfonic acid), carbon cloth/paper; and 
nanomaterials and carbon nano tubes) Europe produces between 15% and 20% of the global 
supply, which could be expected to be insufficient to satisfy European demand.170 
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
A combination of measures are ongoing in the area of clean hydrogen. These measures aim 
to secure access to abundant decarbonised electricity and to the right quantity and quality of raw 
materials, as well as to build industrial capacities along the full hydrogen value chain, including 
components, assemblies and applications in d ownstream sectors. Several EU funding 
programmes contribute to the development of the hydrogen value chain, such as the future Clean 
Hydrogen partnership under Horizon Europe (building on the work of the Fuel Cell and 
Hydrogen Joint Undertaking), the Innov ation Fund, the Connecting Europe Facility, the 
European Regional Development Fund and the Just Transition Fund.  
The Commission has set up the European Clean Hydrogen Alliance announced in the 
March 2020 Industry Strategy. It will deliver an investment and  project pipeline that 
implements the EU Hydrogen Strategy.171 The Alliance will propose concrete projects that 
deliver a robust foundation for the hydrogen value chain, starting from investments in 
renewables and hydrogen infrastructure and covering several  hydrogen use sectors (i.e. industrial 
use, buildings, mobility and energy). The Alliance is also looking at bottlenecks and framework 
conditions to contribute to a favourable investment climate that supports EU policies.  
In this context, there are ongoin g discussions involving several Member States on the 
design of one or more potential IPCEIs . It should be noted that, beyond IPCEI, other State aid 
rules may be applicable to projects in the hydrogen value chain, notably the Environmental 
protection and En ergy Aid Guidelines, which are currently being reviewed. The combination of 
these actions will contribute to launch simultaneously the complete value chain, bringing in 
stakeholders that alone could not implement projects due to the integrated nature of th e hydrogen 
value chain.  
In addition, the Commission is promoting cooperation with neighbouring countries to increase 
supply of renewable hydrogen and derivatives. Global cooperation on research and 
development, standards and definitions of clean hydrogen will be essential  for the 
emergence of a global, rules -based market for hydrogen that contributes to a secure, sustainable 
and competitive hydrogen supply for the EU market.  
As regards possible dependencies with a potential impact on relevant clean hydrog en 
technologies such as fuel cells and electrolysers, ongoing actions in the area of raw 
materials are of key importance. The actions under the Raw Materials action plan and the 
                                                           
170 European Commission: Materials dependencies for dual -use technologies relevant to Europe's defence sector, 
2019  
171 COM(2020)301  
 
81 
 European Raw Materials Alliance (see chapter 5.1) are of key importance to mit igate risks of 
access to raw materials relevant for these technologies. They include increased recycling, 
stronger intra -EU supply capacities and diversification of foreign supply. Furthermore, some 
additional technology specific options are relevant for t hese hydrogen technologies.   
There is an ongoing effort to reduce the quantity of raw materials with supply risk needed 
for the production of fuel cells and electrolysers.  Due to the high cost of platinum, the industry 
has already successfully reduced the  quantity of platinum needed in some applications. Further 
efforts are needed to minimise or completely eliminate the need for various critical raw 
materials. In addition, dependencies on supply of specific raw materials are effectively reduced 
by substitu ting them with raw materials with lower risks of permanent or temporary disruptions 
in supply. For example, platinum could at least partially be replaced by palladium and other 
materials in fuel cells. Finally, to mitigate short - to medium -term supply disr uptions in the event 
of a crisis, stockpiling options could also be examined at EU or Member State level, supporting 
corporate strategies to mitigate risks.  
In addition, reduced needs for critical raw materials can also be achieved by in parallel 
developing alternative technologies . Different technologies could be applied based on best 
technical suitability, raw material supply and cost. While flexibility is limited in some 
applications (like in on -board mobile solutions), other sectors could utili se a wider selection of 
technologies that rely on a different combination of raw materials.  
  
 
82 
 5.5 Semiconductors  
Semiconductor chips are the basic building blocks of all digital products and services. 
Semiconductor components, among them processors, are today embedded in almost everything, 
from cars, aircraft and medical equipment to cell phones, networks and supercomputers. They 
determine the characteristics of the products into which they are embedded – including security, 
privacy, energy performance and safe ty – shaping how Europe’s green and digital transition will 
unfold. In essence, they underpin the digital value chain.  This review looks in more detail at 
possible dependencies and vulnerabilities that the EU faces in the area of semiconductors as well 
as relevant possible (ongoing) measures.  
a) Context and possible weaknesses in the EU   
For decades the semiconductors industry has been driven forward by the capability to 
squeeze an ever -increasing number of transistors into a given area of semiconductor 
material .172 Miniaturisation of feature sizes is at the core of both faster and more power -efficient 
microprocessors used in communications, consumer electronics and computing, including 
supercomputing. The most advanced chips in production in 2020 are at 5n m. PCs and cell 
phones, which account for the highest market volume across the whole electronics sector, are the 
main drivers of miniaturisation. High production volumes in these market segments help to 
sustain the high cost of technology development.  
Over  time, leading -edge chips have become more difficult and more costly to produce.  
Designing and developing the most technologically advanced chips today can cost up to 1 billion 
EUR, while a leading -edge fabrication plant (“Fab”) requires investments up to 20 billion EUR. 
This has led to a consolidation in the number of leading -edge chip manufacturers . In 2020, 
only 2 companies, TSMC (Taiwan) and Samsung (S. Korea) manufacture  chips at 5nm. Intel 
(US) announced that its 7nm technology has been delayed until 2022, illustrating  the 
technological complexity of chip fabrication at such dimensions. Europe has no foundries that 
offer manufacturing of components with feature sizes below 22nm.  
Energy performance of a system is highly dependent on the energy efficienc y of the 
semiconductor chip(s) inside . The emergence of AI edge processing and a pplications such as 
highly automated driving combined with car electrification will generate huge amounts of data . 
Processing such data at the speed needed to capture widely it s benefits will require an important 
shift in the way we conceive and produce electronic components and systems. Scaling up 
computing performance with today’s component technologies will however make computing one 
of the biggest energy -consuming activities . In fact, all these upcoming and future applications 
will require highly performant p rocessor chips that exhibit radically lower energy consumption.   
                                                           
172 This progressive miniaturisation of feature sizes has come with a corresponding incr ease in performance, most 
notably a doubling of computing speed every two years (Moore’s Law). Today’s most advanced microprocessor 
chips contain some 10s of billions of transistors and can process 10s of trillions of operations per second. The 
generations  of technologies are defined by the critical dimension of the transistors, which thanks to advanced 
photolithographic techniques, are on the order of some few nanometres (nm).  
 
83 
 Bringing AI to the device: the US industry has set its sights on the burgeoning edge -AI market 
as illustrated with recent mergers.173 Notable among emerging trends in AI based on different 
technologies are neuromorphic and quantum computing.  
The biggest demand for semiconductors comes from outside the EU . In particular China 
represents more than 50% of today’s semiconductor market and as such, Chinese demand 
significantly supports and drives the growth of the semiconductor industry worldwide. The 
Covid -19 outbreak has sped up the digital transformation and led to short -term shifts in 
the demand across se ctors . On the one hand, the demand for cloud/data centre services, 
“working from home products” and medical devices has increased, on the other, lock -downs and 
loss of income reduced the demand for cars, mobile phones and consumer electronics.174  
The develo pment and fabrication of chips has been increasingly subject to massive 
subsidies . In order to reduce its dependence on imports, notably from chips made in Taiwan , and 
more generally from US -developed technology which can be subject to unilateral US export  
control restrictions, China has set itself the ambition of reaching 70% autonomy in chip -making 
by 2025 with the revenues of its home -grown chip industry growing to USD 305 billion by 2030. 
To this end it has allocated USD 150 billion over 10 years under the “Made in China 2025” plan 
to build up research excellence and manufacturing capacity. Such measures have served to 
support local industrial ecosystems.  In the wake of the COVID -19 crisis, the US has responded 
to China’s bid for independence  with a USD 25 billion plan over 5 years to support investments 
in R&D and manufacturing, to reduce its dependencies on other parts of the globe, notably 
Taiwan.175 Meanwhile, the South Korean government announced a plan to spend KRW 1 trillion 
(USD 869 million) to deve lop AI chips through 2029.176 The ICT ministry plans to put the next -
generation chip on the Korean New Deal project list for KRW 20 trillion (USD 17,38 billion) 
                                                           
173 Intel , leader in CPUs, acquired Altera  (USD 17B) for their FPGAs and are now introducing their discrete GPUs, 
such as Xe, also for AI in data centres.  
Nvidia , leading in programmable GPUs and AI, is planning to acquire ARM  (USD 40B). GPUs, initially 
conceived to process images, are now being widely used for AI acceleration to speed up processes such as neural 
network and machine learning tasks. ARM has the IP needed to excel in CPUs (and low -power AI at the edge).  
AMD , the challenger in both CPUs and GPUs, has acquired Xilinx  (EUR 35B). The a cquisition will reinforce its 
position as a credible alternative for the datacentre/AI market. Xilinx also offers SmartNIC for network 
acceleration, which for AMD can be another asset for data centres in view of Intel’s acquisition of Infiniband and 
Nvidia ’s acquisition of Mellanox. Intel acquired Altera end of 2015; the announcements by Nvidia and by AMD 
were in 2020.  
Worth noting is the fundamental difference between ARM and Intel (i.e. X86) approaches to CPUs/processing 
units and hence their different ap plication markets. The former focuses on low -power consumption and the latter 
on advanced performance, which in turns leads to more power consumption and higher use of silicon space. The 
low-power approach of ARM has allowed ARM to offer the best balance o f performance and energy efficiency for 
mobile devices including chips for cell phones and laptops.  
174 Accenture (2020) Semiconductor Companies: Business Resilience in the Wake of COVID -19 A guide to the 
disruptive impacts & practical actions for semicondu ctor companies to take, retrieved from 
https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/PDF -126/Accenture -High -Tech -Covid -19-SEMICONDUCTOR -Final.pdf   
175 In fact the plan earmarks 12 B$ to attract TSMC to build a 5nm fabrication facility in Arizona with construction 
planned for 2021 and production for 2024 . At the invitation of Japanese government TSMC is planning to set up a 
joint advanced packaging and testin g plant in Japan. https://focustaiwan.tw/business/202101050014   
176 https://techcr unch.com/2020/10/13/south -korea -pushes -for-ai-semiconductors -as-global -demand -grows/  
https://en.yna.co.kr/view/AEN20201012007500320   
 
84 
 state aid to help attract more financial support, on top of KRW 70 billion from another fund tied  
to the semiconductor industry. The Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry has 
invited Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. (TSMC) to set up a joint advanced integrated 
circuit packaging and testing plant in Japan to address Japanese customers in power solutions, 
automotive, wind energy and industrial machinery.177 Geopolitical tensions and the lack of a 
level playing field harm the competition in this area.  
Europe’s semiconductor footprint is small compared to other regions in particular in the 
digital sector.  Compared to its economic weight (close to 23 % of world GDP), the EU shares of 
global revenues for semiconductor chips is ~10% overall and ~6% for the computing and 
communication segments. Limited existing production capacity to serve future  demand, high 
entry costs and lack of a level playing field (including inadequate access to financing) and 
different regulations in extra EU regions are threatening the EU firms’ capacity to fully seize the 
opportunity to capitalise on the digital transform ation. Therefore, the digital sector will be an 
important area for Europe to focus on in order to reduce dependencies in the future and to fully 
seize the opportunity of the digital transformation.  
b) Origin of vulnerabilities  
The semiconductor industry is a global industry based on ever shorter cycles of very 
advanced technologies at all phases of the value chain with long learning cycles. The supply 
chain stretches from chip design, semiconductor manufacturing to test, assembl y and packaging 
(also referred to as back -end processes), before reaching end -user companies, which integrate the 
chips into their products.  Materials, equipment and related services and tools, including 
electronic design automation tools and functional bl ocks or IP blocks, enable design and 
manufacturing. The semiconductor supply chain is well -integrated, with no single country or 
company dominating all the different stages of the value chain ( Graph 35 ). 
Graph 34: The semiconductor value chain  
 
 
                                                           
177 https://focustaiwan.tw/business/202101050014   

 
85 
 R&D is an integral part of the design, testing and deployment of new chip technologies 
including developing advanced production proce sses. Chipmakers typically invest about a 
third of their revenues in R&D and equipment. Because it is so capital intensive, aspects such as 
access to funding and market capacity (considering actual and future demand for goods & 
services) are vital to susta in technology development.  
Graph 35: No single country or company dominates all of the stages of the value chain  
 
Source: IDC Manufacturing Insights  
Development and production of semiconductor components in Europe is concentrated 
mainly in Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium and Ireland.  An 
extensive ecosystem of companies distributed across Europe supplies materials, equipment and 
related services for semiconductor manufacturing. The major EU hea dquartered suppliers 
Infineon (DE), NXP (NL), ST Microelectronics (FR/IT) and Bosch Semiconductors (DE) 
operate globally, serving OEMs in automotive, industrial automation, security and healthcare 
(where they are global market leaders) as well as aeronauti cs, energy production and 
telecommunications.  
The different shares in revenues across the semiconductor value chain shed more light on 
where strengths and weaknesses in the EU semiconductor value chain lie ( Graph 36 ). Europe 
has notable weaknesses in design and design automation tools178 as reflected in the small share 
of EU -based companies in “IP / electronic design automation” and “fabless” chip companies . 
These parts of the supply chain are mainly under US proprietary control. Packaging, assembly 
and testing, and chip fabrication are located mostly in Asia (see “semiconductor assembly, 
testing services” and “pure -play foundry”). Advanced packaging technol ogies – enabling 
integration of different functional components in single ‘chiplets’ – are increasingly important to 
address increasing power and energy efficiency needs that come with electrical vehicles on the 
one hand and the plethora of edge -computing applications driven by AI on the other. Europe is 
                                                           
178 Chip design and electronic design automation environments enable the design of electronic devices and digital 
components.  

 
86 
 thus strongly dependent on the US for general design tools and on Asia for advanced chip 
fabrication.  
 Graph 36: Share of revenues per region across the semiconductor value chain  
 
Source: Gartner; IHS; Strategy Analytics; McKinsey  
Note: Chips design and electronic design automation tools are protected with intellectual property rights and often 
referred to as intellectual property (IP).  
The European electronic industry enjoys global leadership in innovation positions in power 
electronics, sensors and advanced chip -making equipment.  The ongoing projects under the 
IPCEI on Microelectronics, approved in December 2018, have played an important role in 
stimulating additional private  investments in innovation and eventually also in manufacturing in 
the EU179, in particular for Automotive and IoT markets. Manufacturers of chips at leading -edge 
nodes (TSMC, Samsung, Intel) rely for their technology development on specific EUV 
photolithogr aphy machines produced by a unique global supplier, notably ASML (NL), which 
belongs to the European electronic ecosystem. ECSEL Joint Undertaking  set up in 2014, which 
supported close to 80 research projects,  was instrumental to advance equipment technolo gy 
development in miniaturization through the pilot integration of 3nm semiconductor 
technology.180 
As set out above,  Europe has no foundries that offer advanced manufacturing of 
components with feature sizes below 22 nm (necessary for memory and processor c hips) 
and therefore has to rely on Samsung or TSMC to that end. Processors are critical enablers of 
growing importance in data processing for communication, edge -AI components, and high -end 
and general purpose computing.  
EU suppliers are strong in dedicate d processors (micro -controllers) for embedded systems 
applications in automotive (37% global market share)  and industrial uses including 
machinery  (17% global market share). These markets are expected to grow significantly in the 
coming years. European com panies are strong in power management and energy -efficient 
                                                           
179  The technologies at focu s in the approved IPCEI on Microelectronics are divided in 5 technology fields along 
the microelectronics value chain, namely energy efficient chips, power semiconductors, sensors, advanced optical 
equipment and compound materials. Automotive and IoT are t he two main target markets.    
180 https://www.ecsel.eu/projects/pin3s    

 
87 
 semiconductor technology solutions in these sectors. The EU suppliers have currently very 
limited market presence in generic processor design and process technology design and 
manufacturing. This i s reflected in  modest global market share in  communication (e.g. mobile 
phones) and data processing (e.g. personal computers) amounting to 5% and 3% respectively. In 
the design of general -purpose processors, Europe relies almost entirely on design tools an d 
design IP developed by US companies.  
Graph 37: Global and EU market share in sales by application sector (2019)  
  
Source: SIA and EU Study, respectively.  
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
With high entry cost, escalating trade tensions and subsidies at global level, dependence on Asia 
for advanced chip fabrication and on the US for chip design tools, the EU supply chain is left 
increasingly vulnerable. Europe needs to strengthen its own ind ustrial position to minimise risks 
from trade disruptions and boost innovation and competitiveness in the application sectors.  
Reinforce processors and semiconductor technology for data processing, communication and 
related data infrastructure, and new app lications of AI  
Joint European actions and initiatives will need to strongly focus on rebuilding capabilities in 
processors and semiconductor technologies critical to enable powerful and energy -efficient data 
processing, communication, infrastructure and t he many applications of AI. In this respect, it will 
be fundamental to reduce critical dependencies in advanced technologies and process technology 
manufacturing at leading edge nodes, advanced packaging, and in critical IP design blocks and 
platforms for digital components. Indeed, in terms of manufacturing, high -end microprocessors 
such as CPUs and GPUs require leading -edge fabrication facilities. A new fab with the latest 
technology (2nm in 2025/6) is challenging both technologically and economically (EU R 20 
billion upfront and EUR 5 billion p.a. to operate) and is not in the reach of any individual EU 
supplier today.  

 
88 
 A joint European effort181 and an investment plan aiming at positioning Europe in emerging 
critical technologies and at consolidating areas of proven expertise  
In a joint declaration ‘A European Initiative on Processors and Semiconductor Technologies’182 
presented at the EU Competiti veness Council of 7 December 2020, a large number of Member 
States have agreed to work together in order to bolster Europe’s electronics and embedded 
systems value chain. This will include a particular effort to reinforce the processor and 
semiconductor ec osystem and to expand industrial presence across the supply chain, in order to 
address key technological, security and societal challenges. Member States agreed to consolidate 
and build on Europe’s position in areas of proven expertise, and aim to establis h advanced 
European chip design capabilities and production facilities progressing towards leading -edge 
nodes for data processing and connectivity. In the joint declaration, the signatory Member States 
discuss a possible industrial alliance on microelectro nics and processors, which could mobilise 
industrial partners, as well as possibly designing a proposal for an IPCEI.  
Concretely, when it comes to cooperating and engaging in efforts to co -invest in next generation 
semiconductor technologies across the fu ll value chain, the declaration highlights:  
 the mobilisation of industrial stakeholders through a future industrial alliance to establish 
strategic roadmaps and research and investment plans for processor design, deployment and 
fabrication that takes into account the full semiconductor ecosystem;  
 addressing common challenges through various funding mechanisms, including where 
feasible through the national Recovery and Resilience plans, contributing to a substantial 
increase in the production capability in Europe of semiconductors and embedded systems 
across the value chain, and processor chips with significant improvements in energy 
performance and speed by 2025; and,  
 the design of a multi -country and inclusive European Flagship Project through the 
develop ment of a proposal for an Important Project of Common European Interest that aims 
to create a strong dynamic to bolster Europe’s electronics industry with a focus on the 
design ecosystem, supply chain capabilities and first industrial deployment of advance d 
semiconductor technologies, including scaling towards leading -edge process technologies 
for processor chips.  
European Recovery and Resilience Facility  
EU plans for investment in semiconductors have to be considered in a global context of strong 
regional  support to the sector. China, the US, Japan and South Korea are examples of countries 
devoting large amounts of public resources to minimise dependencies and strengthen their global 
presence in specific segments of the value chain (e.g. manufacturing, des ign).  
In this respect it is worth noting that semiconductor technologies and notably processor chips, 
are among the areas identified for investment for the Recovery and Resilience Facility. 20% of 
the European Recovery and Resilience plans should go to di gital transition; this is up to EUR 
                                                           
181 With the involvement of Industry, Member States and the European Commission  
182 https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/news/joint -declaration -processors -and-semiconductor -technologies   
 
89 
 145 billion over the next 2 to 3 years. The Recovery and Resilience Facility presents a unique 
opportunity to help financing the efforts identified in the December 2020 Declaration mentioned 
above.  
Europe can consolidate  its position through joint initiatives and investments involving 
technology suppliers and users, targeting applications and products with high -added value and 
strong system integration.  
The EU has an important position in mobile network infrastructure bu t communication 
equipment (radio base stations, switching centres, central offices) is powered today by 
components which are mainly designed and made outside the EU, such as critical semiconductor 
components, including secure processors, for 5G and next ge neration connectivity.  
Research and industrial deployment driven by leading system manufacturers covering design and 
leading -edge manufacturing could support achieving the EU’s objectives as set out in the Digital 
Decade.  
Regulatory framework that boosts competitiveness and protects EU interests  
The EU semiconductor sector has been left in a vulnerable position due to lack of investment. 
But investment alone is not sufficient as is evidenced by the acquisition of companies both large 
and small despite havi ng been supported financially by the EU and Member States. A more 
holistic approach is needed.   
The recent EU foreign direct investment (FDI) screening regulation that became operational on 
11 October 2020 provides the European Commission the opportunity to assess the risks of 
foreign investments into all companies, including companies active in the semi -conductor sector 
from a European perspective in terms of impact on security and public order. This includes 
impact on programmes of Union interest regarding critical infrastructure, critical technologies or 
critical inputs.  
Semiconductor supply chain  resilience  
Resilient supply chains are essential in times of crisis to absorb shocks, offer options to adjust 
and speed up recovery. Most supply chains have shown remarkable resilience during the crisis. 
However, structural problems such as massive disto rtive government subsidies, export 
restrictions and pandemic -related spikes in demand contributed to a shortage of chips that first 
emerged in the automotive sector and then extended to other sectors, including 5G and medical 
equipment. The EU semiconducto r sector will require a resilient, diverse, and secure supply 
chain to prosper.  
The EU strongly supports global efforts in the G20, the WTO and bilateral relations, to monitor 
critical supply chains, keep them open and undisrupted, and ensure fair and equi table access to 
critical goods. Enhancing the resilience and sustainability of supply chains is therefore a pillar of 
the EU’s drive towards open strategic autonomy.  
Further in -depth assessment and monitoring is needed as regards the risks associated with  
different stages of the semiconductor supply chain, including on the origins and sources of 
supplies beyond the EU. Such risks may be related to critical inputs and equipment for the 
industry, including digital products that may be vulnerable, manufacturi ng capacities and other 
 
90 
 risks that may disrupt, compromise or negatively affect the supply chain (e.g. the existence of 
possible single or vulnerable suppliers, supply chains with a single point of failure, stages of the 
chain established in unreliable par tner countries). The availability of substitutes or alternative 
sources for critical inputs are key elements to consider as well. Resilient and sustainable 
transport also plays an important role in facilitating international trade and preserving the EU’s 
supply chains.  
A coherent mix of industrial, research and trade policies can facilitate the process of 
diversification to alternative sources of supply and strengthening of existing supply chains 
through partnership and collaboration with likeminded countri es.  For example, the US review of 
its semiconductor supply chain (announced on 25 February 2021) directs the US administration 
to work with partners and allies to ensure that they too have strong and resilient supply chains. 
This could offer an opportunit y for the EU to engage in joint work in the framework of the new 
Trade and Technology Council bilaterally, or possibly in plurilateral settings with Japan, Korea 
or Taiwan.  
Monitoring of subsidy programmes and market access barriers will continue in multi lateral, 
bilateral and plurilateral settings notably in the public -industry Government Authorities Meeting 
on Semiconductors (GAMS) for the six semiconductor manufacturing regions (US, Taiwan, 
Korea, Japan, China and EU), which contributes to achieving tra nsparency and levelling the 
playing field. This monitoring will enable the Commission, together with other countries, to 
assess possible solutions to potential trade distortions.   
 
91 
 5.6 Cloud and Edge Computing   
a) Context and possible weaknesses in the EU  
Data is  becoming a strategic asset for any organisation in its digital and sustainable 
transformation . Cloud computing technologies provide the data processing capacities required 
to enable data -driven innovation, and thus represent a key enabling technology of s trategic 
importance to Europe’s industrial future, as emphasised in the New Industrial Strategy for 
Europe. Cloud computing is a technology that combines hardware and software to allow on -
demand remote access to a scalable and elastic pool of shareable and  distributed computing 
resources. Those computing resources include resources such as networks, servers or other 
infrastructure, operating systems, software, storage, applications and services.183  
Cloud technologies are crucial for the digital transformatio n of businesses and the public 
sector as they offer faster, cheaper and more flexible computing methods than conventional 
ones.  They offer the possibility to scale up company business processes according to varying 
user demands for data processing and ofte n in a much cheaper way than traditional in -house IT 
solutions. The accessibility of documents, software or videoconferencing from outside of the 
traditional office structures made cloud an indispensable technology for running the daily 
business operations  of European companies during the pandemic.  
Cloud is also crucial in contributing to common European sustainability goals of the Green 
Deal by enabling the transformation of different economic sectors of the European 
economy, while becoming themselves mor e climate -neutral and sustainable.  In the context 
of Europe’s recovery , cloud technologies enhance the delivery of public services to citizens and 
will boost the growth of small and medium -sized enterprises by enabling the creation of new, 
added -value prod ucts and services.  
Several trends emphasise the critical importance of cloud and data processing technologies  
for our society and economy.  As highlighted in the European data strategy,184 we are 
witnessing a shift in the data paradigm. The volume of generate d data is greatly increasing and a 
growing proportion of data is being processed at the edge . Edge computing generally refers to a 
form of delivery of cloud computing services in a highly distributed form, closer to where data 
are being generated or collec ted, thus moving from the traditional centralised model of data 
processing to a highly distributed one. By 2025, 80% of all generated data are expected to be 
processed at the edge.185 This shift will require the development and deployment of 
fundamentally ne w data processing technologies encompassing the edge, moving away from 
centralised cloud -based infrastructure models . Cloud and edge will continue to co -exist and new 
data management techniques will enable to determine where data are best processed, in 
centralised or in more distributed capacities, closer to the users. The integration of these different 
data processing ca pacities with more local computing resources will form a computing 
continuum  that is the seamless integration of diverse computing environments spanning from 
                                                           
183 COM(2020)823 final, Recital 16  
184 COM(2020)66 final  
185 COM(2020)66 fina l, p. 2  
 
92 
 high performance computing and big data centres to edge, fog, swarm (highly distributed 
intelligen ce) and embedded computing.  
The data paradigm shift also means that cloud technologies are increasingly becoming 
strategic innovation enablers for the uptake and effective functioning of technologies such 
as artificial intelligence, and Internet of Things.  In this new data paradigm, less data will be 
stored in data centres and more data will be spread in a pervasive way closer to the user ‘at the 
edge’. Processing data much closer to where they are generated or collected allows faster 
reaction times, which in turn enables new services and applications. The need for abundant 
computing power crunching data for deep learning and distributed ledgers can be satisfied 
through the computing continuum formed by the integration of high -performance computing, 
cloud an d edge computing. In the future, one of the main trends for AI hardware computation 
will indeed be the move to ‘the edge’, on devices that are closer to the users of real -time AI 
applications. This will also be the case for many other new emerging digital technologies (data 
analytics, security of transactions, automation, etc.). AI services are estimated to be among the 
most transformational services leveraging cloud capabilities across the computing continuum, 
particularly at the edge to execute AI algorit hms.186  
Furthermore, cloud computing technologies are crucial for increasing the innovation 
potential of data sharing and data re -use services.  To make the most out of the increasing 
amount of data produced, the European data strategy foresees the deploymen t of EU common 
data spaces  in key public and private sectors. Data spaces will foster ecosystems (of companies, 
civil society and individuals) creating new products and services based on more accessible data, 
and as such increase Europe’s capacities to bec ome a world leader in the data economy. Such 
common data spaces will heavily rely upon the availability and access to secure, energy -
efficient, affordable and high -quality data processing capacities.  
The current COVID -19 crisis has further highlighted the  critical importance of availability 
of data processing technologies for our economy and society.  The crisis had the effect of a 
growing use of cloud -enabled services, such as videoconferencing, data analytics and 
collaborative platform services. Secure pr ocessing, storage, sharing and analysis of public and 
industrial data as well as collaborative services, such as distance learning and teleworking have 
become essential services to EU citizens, businesses and the public sector. Cloud played also a 
crucial role in coronavirus research, as it enables availability and effective sharing of massive 
quantities of biochemical data.187 
The New Industrial Strategy for Europe emphasised that the strengths of the European 
industry needs to be channelled towards gaining leadership in areas where the EU still lags 
behind, such as on cloud technologies and data applications.188 Currently, the public cloud 
infrastructure market is converging globally around four large non -European companies. The 
United States has the most significant companies in the global cloud market, and in particular, 
                                                           
186 IDC Future Scape: Multiplied Innovation Takes Off, Powered by AI, Distributed Public Cloud, Microservices, 
Developer Population Explosion, Greater Specialization and Verticalization, and Scaling Trust, 2019.  
187 https://www.h -cloud.eu/news/cloud -computing -and-covid -19/ 
188 COM(2020)102 final, p. 2  
 
93 
 the public cloud infrastructure market t hat generates the biggest revenues,189 while Europe 
currently has no significant global cloud infrastructure companies. This market structure could 
create entry barriers for new or smaller companies, which lack the necessary resources to scale -
up their servi ces notably across borders, or deploy the latest state -of-the-art technologies. 
Furthermore, a strong degree of vertical integration of different cloud services (such as bundling 
of infrastructure and software services) especially by large cloud providers190 may also make 
market entries of the new providers more difficult. Several Chinese companies are also starting 
to invest heavily and will increasingly enter the EU cloud market. Also, the public cloud 
infrastructure market largely overshadowed by the US pl ayers also raises concerns over the 
European cloud users’ ability to maintain control over strategic and sensitive personal and non -
personal data. Unfair commercial practices191 and a lack of interoperability and data portability 
between cloud providers crea te risks of vendor lock -in, undermining users’ trust in cloud 
computing services and cloud uptake.   
However, Europe has a unique market opportunity in the next five years to strengthen its 
data processing technologies by capitalising on the changes to come , in particular related to 
edge computing.  To seize it, Europe can build on its industrial expertise and strength in some 
areas of the computing value chain, such as business -to-business application, system integration, 
industrial Internet of Things system s and 5G. Finally, the EU has a unique regulatory framework 
to become a standard setter also in a global merit for non -discriminatory norms on data storage 
and processing. This would also allow to address European users’ demand for increased 
transparency a nd control over legitimate access, processing and storage of their personal and 
commercially sensitive data.  
b) Origin of vulnerabilities  
The vulnerabilities of the EU cloud market lay predominantly in the market’s structure.192 
A few large, foreign cloud prov iders dominate the public cloud market in the EU. The top four 
global leaders on the public cloud infrastructure market – often referred to as hyperscalers 
(Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud and Alibaba Cloud) will 
account for over 8 0% of global revenues in 2021.193 They are also among the most popular cloud 
providers for European businesses. According to Synergy Research Group’s data, a few EU 
cloud and telco providers (OVH cloud, Deutsche Telecom, Orange, KPN) challenge their 
popularity to a limited extent within s elected national markets in the EU.  
                                                           
189 Synergy Research Group, 2021: https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/cloud -market -ends-2020 -high-while -
microsoft -continues -gain-ground -amazon   
190 See section b) below  
191 The most prevalent unfair practices in cloud contracts are mapped in the European Commission’s Study on the 
Economic Detriment to Small and Medium -Sized Enterprises Arising from Unfair and Unbalanced Cloud 
Computing Contracts , 2019: https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/study -economic -detriment -small -and-medium -
sized -enterprises -arising -unfair -and-unbalanced -cloud -computing -contracts_en    
192 COM(2020) 66 final, p. 9  
193 https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press -releases/2020 -08-10-gartner -says-worldwide -iaas-public -cloud -
services -market -grew -37-point -3-percent -in-2019   
 
94 
 Graph 38: Europe Cloud services leadership  
Rank  Total 
Europe  Germany  France  Netherlands  Rest of 
Europe  
Leader  Amazon  Amazon  Amazon  Amazon  Amazon  
#2 Microsoft  Microsoft  Microsoft  Microsoft  Microsoft  
#3 Google  Google  OVH  Google  Google  
#4 IBM  Deutsche 
Telekom  Orange  KPN  IBM  
#5 Salesforce  IBM  Google  IBM  Salesforce  
#6 Deutsche 
Telekom  Oracle  IBM  Oracle  Swisscom  
 
Source: Based on Iaas, PaaS and hosted private cloud revenues in Q1 2020. The data come from Synergy Research 
Group, 7 May 2020.194 
Compared to the non -European hyperscalers, the EU-based cloud providers hold a relatively 
small market share, both at the European and global level. The largest European cloud service 
provider accounts f or less than 1% of total revenues generated in the European market.  
This asymmetric market share is exacerbated by an asymmetric investment gap of EUR 11 
billion annually in cloud,195 which represents the estimated difference between what the EU 
competitors (US/China) and the EU (both private and public actors) invest in cloud.196 This 
disproportion in investments is also reflected in the higher innovation capacity  of the leading 
cloud p roviders towards European cloud providers.  
Large foreign cloud companies are also effective in closing strategic acquisitions,197 forming 
strategic partnerships198 and performing strategic investments199. Acquisitions of software 
providers allow them to provide a whole stack (i.e. integrated suite) of cloud services  
(Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS)) on top of Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS),200 which are cheaper and more convenient for customers than paying for each component 
                                                           
194 https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/amazon -microsoft -lead-cloud -market -all-major -european -countries  
195 See SWD(2020) 98 final, p. 18, Table 2 which identified investment gaps in several EU digital sectors including 
cloud  
196 On average, the US cloud providers invest ten times more in the research and innovation at the different cloud 
layers than their EU com petitors do  
197 For example, IBM’s acquisition of Red Hat (2019), Microsoft’s acquisition of GitHub (2018), Salesforce’s 
acquisition of Mulesoft (2018)  
198 For example, Microsoft and Volkswagen partnership (2019) to create new automotive cloud; Deutsche Bank a nd 
Google Cloud partnership (2020) to co -innovate the next generation of cloud -based financial services  
199 For example, Microsoft’s USD 1.5 billion investment plan to accelerate digital transformation in Italy (2020) as 
well as its data center region invest ments in Greece (2020) and Austria (2020); Google’s USD 2 billion investment 
in a data center in Poland  
200 For an explanation of these different cloud service models see for example p. 33 -34 of annex  to the 
Commission’s communication COM(2017) 476 final  ‘Making the most of NIS – towards the effective 
implementation of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network 
and information systems across the Union ’ or definitions of these service models in  ISO/IEC 2014:17788  
 
95 
 separatel y, although often leading to vendor lock -in effects.201 Strategic partnerships and 
investments on the other hand allow them to intercept early the specific geographic or product 
markets in need of specific cloud solutions, and to establish and further build their strong 
presence on these markets.  
From an EU industrial perspective, the market position and scale of the hyperscalers on 
these markets makes market entries by other competitors less rewarding (the first mover 
advantage and economies of scale) and p revents the rise of European leadership on new 
market segments.  Specific EU cloud users’ needs  (including processing capacities that are 
close to the user with demonstrated compliance with EU privacy and personal data processing 
legislation, providing for  highly -secured processing environments, preventing unilateral access 
to the data by foreign authorities or any third party and with the reassurances on data processing 
locations) may not be served.  
In addition, vendor lock -in by hyperscalers,202 but also s maller specialized cloud -based 
software service providers creates direct dependencies of the EU users’ base on these cloud 
providers. 203 The cloud users have in practice a very limited if non -existing possibility to switch 
between different cloud service providers or to port their data to other service providers and to 
their own data processing systems.204 This is caused not only by the vert ical integration of the 
hyperscalers making it less profitable for users to seek European alternatives, but also because of 
the lack of interoperability between the different cloud solutions that technically hampers data 
portability. Recent developments to wards hybrid and/or multi -cloud strategies by cloud users 
may mitigate the effect of vendor lock -in, if users can bear the additional costs of handling 
multiple cloud contracts. The use of so -called container technology allows applications to run in 
any ty pe of environment, including different public and private clouds. Vendor lock -in ultimately 
hampers the flow of data across the EU and beyond, a profitable functioning of data value chains 
and the creation of an open, innovative, and sustainable European d ata economy.  
Another reason for dependency of EU cloud users on the hyperscalers is the (purported) non -
existence of an equivalent cloud products offer by the European providers.  This is despite EU 
cloud users and public authorities frequently expressing their concerns with the use of 
foreign cloud services for reasons of personal data protection, cybersecurity or questions 
over applicable law.205 These concerns regarding potential unlawful access to their data by third 
                                                           
201 IDC and Arthur’s Legal - Switching of Cloud Services Providers (2018) https://op.europa.eu/en/publication -
detail/ -/publication/898aeca7 -647e -11e8 -ab9c -01aa75ed71a1  
202 See SWD(2017) Impact Assessment accompanying the proposal for a fra mework for the free flow of non -
personal data in the European Union:  
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better -regulation/have -your-say/initiatives/ 1088 -2nd-Data -Package  
203 Ibid study “Switching of Cloud Services Providers” (2018)  
204 Ibid 
205 See for example the recommendations by French national data protection authority in relation to use of foreign 
cloud provider for hosting the French Health Data Hub:  https://www.cnil.fr/en/council -state-asks-health -data-hub-
additional -guarantees -limit -risk-transfer -united -states  or the German data protection authorities ruling on Microsoft 
Office 365 data protection: https://www.datenschutz.saarland.de/ueber -
uns/oeffentlichkeitsarbeit/detail/pressemitteilung -vom-02102020 -stuttgart -muenchen -ansbach -wiesbaden -
saarbruecken   
 
96 
 countries, if the data is hosted with the providers falling under the foreign jurisdiction, 
exacerbated after the findings of the Court of Justice of the EU regarding national intelligence 
measures of third countries.206 The EU is acting to mitigate such concerns through mutually 
beneficial inte rnational cooperation, such as the proposed EU -U.S. Agreement to facilitate cross 
border access to electronic evidence207, alleviating the risk of conflict of laws and establishing 
clear safeguards for the data of EU citizens and companies. Additionally, in its recent proposal 
for the Regulation on European data governance of 25 November 2020208, the Commission 
continues in its open but assertive approach of the EU Data Strategy, and introduces provisions 
fully safeguarding the protection of public data held by  public sector bodies, users reusing that 
public data, data intermediaries or recognised data altruism organisations when transferred 
abroad .209  
Graph 39: Use of cloud computing services (2018, 2020)  
 
Source: Eurostat, 2020210 
The vendor lock -in practices, unfair contract terms, data protection and cybersecurity 
risks as well as the lack of suitable cloud offering satisfying the needs of the EU cloud 
customers are the most proliferating problems for the EU -based cloud users211 and as such 
are the main reasons for low cloud uptake in the EU.  According to Eurostat’s data, while 
                                                           
206 See Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber) of 16 July 2020 in Data Protection Commissioner v Facebook 
Ireland Limited and Maximillian Schrems , C-311/18, ECLI:EU:C:2020:559.  
207 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/STATEMENT_19_5890   
208 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European data governance (Data 
Governance Act), COM/2020/767 final  
209 See Article 30 of the Data Governance Act proposal  
210 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics -explained/index.php?title=C loud_computing_ -
_statistics_on_the_use_by_enterprises  (the difference in results with the statistics on uptake of technologies outlined 
in chapter 3.1 can be explained by the fact that the survey used as a reference in chapter 3.1 has been more oriented   
towards large organisations)  
211 See the Summary Report on the open public consultation on the European strategy for data, 2020, 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/news/summary -report -public -consultation -european -strategy -data   

 
97 
 improved compared to 2018, only 36% of EU enterprises used cloud services in 2020, mostly for 
simple services such as for e -mail and storage of files. Onl y 55% of those enterprises use 
advanced cloud services relating to financial and accounting software applications, customer 
relationship management or to the use of computing power to run business applications. The 
difference between the top performers and  the Member States with the lowest cloud uptake is 
also still significant. Cloud uptake in the EU is even lower among public administrations. Apart 
from the above mentioned reasons, an additional reason for this situation appears to be the lack 
of common c riteria for procurement of cloud services in Europe.212 
The dependencies of the EU cloud customers on foreign cloud providers  lead to a loss of 
investment potential for the European digital industry in the data processing market, putting  the 
European open st rategic autonomy at risk.  
The dependencies are however not necessarily the same across all segments of the cloud 
market and computing continuum. In particular, EU industry is for now less dependent in the 
currently nascent edge computing segment and certai n market sub -segments of the cloud service 
offerings (e.g. in software as a service and data analytics) and in the system integration of smart 
and low power cloud platforms and middleware.  
European companies also have the potential to grow in many industri al and business 
sectors like smart energy systems, smart home appliances, enterprise systems, 
manufacturing, smart mobility, smart agriculture and food, as well as green technologies in 
general.  They master well the technologies in today’s cyber -physical a nd Internet of Things 
(IoT) systems including industrial cloud solutions. European companies largely control today’s 
complex value chains in these sectors including their digital components from sensors and 
electronic control units to systems technologies.  European Telecom suppliers and operators are 
strong in 5G, which has the potential to become the standard network technology – for the first 
time – enabling direct and seamless network communication from the far -edge level to the cloud, 
thus supporting th e emerge of a European cloud computing continuum . In addition, they still 
today enjoy a much stronger proximity with their clients, both physically and culturally.  
Opportunities for the European computing market  
Software as a Service (SaaS) market  
The total revenues generated by public cloud services (Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS)) across the EU market increased 
by 21% between 2018 and 2019. The 2020 DESI report forecasts that their tot al revenues are 
expected to continue to grow by 50% between 2019 and 2021.213 In 2019,  SaaS represented 
almost two thirds of total public cloud revenues generated within the EU market, a trend poised 
to continue until at least 2021.  
                                                           
212 See p. 26 of H-CLOUD Green Paper , which names furth er reasons for the low uptake of cloud technology in the 
public sector  
213 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) 2020, Integration of digital technology report, p. 8 
https://ec.eu ropa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=67076   
 
98 
 Graph 40: EU public cloud service revenues per deployment model, 2018 – 2021 (€ million)  
 
Source: European Commission based on IDC  
Between 2018 and 2019, four applications (customer relationship management, enterprise risk 
management, workflow and management and collaborative applications) contributed the most to 
SaaS revenues across the EU market. They are expected to remain the most prominent until at 
least 2021 with respective revenue growth rates of 40.1 %; 44.6 %; 40%; and 37.5 % between 
2019 a nd 2021.214 Furthermore, in 2019 software security provided as SaaS application, 
contributed with EUR 115.5 million to total SaaS revenues within the EU market. With its 
revenue growth rate expected to increase by 48% between 2019 and 2021, it should be the fastest 
growing SaaS application over this period. This strong growth in software services constitutes 
a major opportunity for European providers to leverage their position in the SaaS market.  
Graph 41: Revenue of the top four Sa aS applications in share of total SaaS EU revenues, 
2018 – 2021 (€ million)  
 
Source: European Commission based on IDC  
 
 
 
                                                           
214 DESI 2020, Integration of digital technology report, p. 9  

 
99 
 Edge computing  
Furthermore, as introduced earlier, the way in which data is stored and processed is progressively 
changing215 with edge computing gaining momentum.216 The main users of edge services are 
healthcare, transport, financial, manufacturing, retail and energy and utilities sectors as well as 
governments, which need to process large volumes of data in a real time. Considering t he 
increasing trend where more and more data will be generated at the edge, this will give a market 
advantage to those actors who deploy the edge nodes . According to IDC's forecast, the 
worldwide edge computing market will reach USD 250.6 billion (around E UR 206.5 billion) in 
2024.217  
Today, there are no dominant players or world regions for edge computing.218 However it is 
expected that over the next several years the investments on edge computing will be concentrated 
mostly in the US, China and Western Europ e (IDC estimates that the EMEA region will capture 
27.9% of the overall global edge market spending219).  
The combination of (1) a new technical paradigm (cloud to edge computing), (2) an emerging 
edge computing market, and (3) initial conditions where Europ ean providers (telecommunication 
sector, cloud providers, edge providers) have some strengths, constitutes the best opportunity 
for Europe to revert today’s cloud market structure and regain autonomy in a market 
dominated by non -EU providers . European focu s could also be on supporting the emergence of 
smaller providers at the edge market and their growth, in order to prevent the situation where a 
few big actors dominate this market.  
Telco -cloud and multi -cloud computing  
The roll -out of 5G networks around t he globe, sometimes referred to as telco -cloud solutions ,220 
constitutes another opportunity . Being home to a number of strong telecommunications 
providers  that have a key role in investing and operating edge computing capabilities over their 
                                                           
215 The reasons for the increasing popularity of edge technologies include the increased use of connected devices 
that are generating progressively mo re data and are demanding increasingly more computing capacities to provide 
real-time insights. The other factors for the rise of edge computing include 5G use cases (URLLC) requiring low 
latency; augmented/virtual/mixed reality that are requiring faster p rocessing capabilities to unlock the technology 
value; large volumes of videos that are a significant burden for network workloads; AI that is demanding high 
amounts of computations closer to where the data are being produced; data analytics requiring larg e volumes of 
computer operations to accelerate speeds of insights.  
216 Benefits of edge computing include localized computing power close to the user, low latency, hybrid storage 
capacity, security, energy -efficiency and increased control of the user over th eir data.  
217 Forecast by IDC’s Worldwide Edge Spending Guide, 2020, 
https://www.idc.com/g etdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS46878020#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20new%20Worldw
ide,the%202019%E2%80%932024%20forecast%20period .  
218 It is expected that half of the edge computing market will be captured by cloud providers, the other half will be 
captured by software, IoT, AI, consulting, telecommunication, infrastructure, system integrator and semiconductor 
companies.  
219 IDC’s Worldwide Edge Spending Guide, 2020  
220 Telco edge -cloud can be described as small data center resources required for local data processing of different 
services, with data transfer capabilities by carrier companies. Telco edge -cloud solutions typically include network 
function virtualization ( NFV) that accelerates the speed of launching 5G networks, software -defined data centers 
(SDDC) and networking (SDN), as well as multi -access edge computing (MEC).  
 
100 
 networks in Europe, the EU also has an advantageous position to establish a visible presence in 
the telco -cloud market. Utilizing the expertise of European telecom providers combined with the 
specialization of European cloud providers, Europe can build telco -cloud sol utions notably at the 
edge – leveraging the joint deployment of 5G and edge computing infrastructures – in a way that 
meets the security and environmental requirements of the European market.  
A further opportunity for Europe is the market for multi -cloud .221 Multi -cloud solutions gain 
their popularity as a risk -mitigation tool in order to minimise the risks of data loss or downtime 
caused by local component failure in the cloud environment. While the  foreign cloud 
hyperscalers are moving towards extending the ir leadership also on this market, a competitive 
European alternative for a multi -cloud solution would be needed, building on an open source and 
governance by an independent organisation.  
c) Way forward and relevant (ongoing) measures  
While the recent proposa l for a Digital Markets Act222 aims to achieve a fairer and more 
competitive business environment between business users of cloud services and so -called 
gatekeepers  among the providers of cloud computing services,223 the vulnerabilities identified in 
the EU cl oud market also concern a broader category of cloud service providers, including 
smaller cloud providers. There is a need to safeguard practical compliance with the EU 
legislative framework, enable data portability, resolve vendor lock -in issues and addres s the 
innovation needs in a setting that applies to all cloud service providers in the EU market.  
In line with Europe’s data, green and industrial strategies and in order to capitalise on the 
data paradigm shift and next wave of innovation, a coordinated European action between 
the EU, Member States and industry is critical to trigger major investments in the next 
generation cloud technologies meeting the key EU rules and standards.  The advent of edge 
computing could serve to strengthen the position of EU businesses in the cloud market, to 
provide a complementary European supply alternative. Building on its strength in industrial and 
business applications, industrial IoT systems and 5G, Europe has a one -time opportunity to bring 
its industrial actors back t o playing a significant role in the computing market by 2025, 
improving its open strategic autonomy.  
The EU will support research and development, and the large -scale deployment of next 
generation cloud infrastructures and services across the EU . In the E uropean data strategy, 
the European Commission sets out its ambitions for the period 2021 -2027 to co -invest in 
European data spaces and a European cloud federation . These investments will be channelled 
through the Digital Europe Programme , Connecting Europ e Facility 2  and Horizon Europe . The 
focus must be on fostering a competitive, secure, trustworthy, sustainable, distributed, end -to-end 
European computing supply that will adapt to a multiple vendor environment and enable the 
                                                           
221 Multi -cloud can be described as a use of several cloud computing services under a single heterogeneous cloud 
architecture  
222 COM(2020) 842 final. The Digital Markets Act complements (EU and national) competition law which remains 
fully applicable.  
223 See Ar ticle 2(1) of the Digital Markets Act proposal COM (2020)842 final  
 
101 
 deployment of European data s paces. This supply should enable the transition to a computing 
continuum with strong capacities at the edge and far edge in an energy efficient and trustworthy 
manner. It will ensure the gradual rebalance between centralised data infrastructures in the clo ud 
and highly distributed and smart data processing at the edge across the EU.  
EU investments will be complemented by private and national co -investments.  In October 
2020, all Member States signed the  joint Declaration  ‘Building the next generation cloud for 
business and public sector in Europe’224 and agreed to work together via DEP, CEF2 and the 
Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), to upgrade existing data processing capacities, shape 
the next generation cloud supply for Europe and stimulate the uptake of cloud services across the 
EU. The Recovery a nd Resilience Facility ‘Scale up’ Flagship  (as part of Next Generation 
EU) will be a significant channel for Member States’ investments in data processing capacities. 
Under the Scale -up, cloud is identified as one of the areas for strategic investments and  reforms, 
with the aim to close Europe’s cloud investment gap and foster cloud adoption. The 2021 Annual 
Sustainable Growth Strategy establishes a ‘Scale -up’ EU Flagship  with the ambition of doubling 
the use of advanced cloud services225 by 2025  across the E U compared to 2018 levels (i.e. from 
16% to 32%). Member States also have the possibility to co -invest in the context of  multi -
country -projects  to foster the access to cloud and edge capacities from anywhere across the EU 
territory.  
The Industrial Strategy  from March 2020 stated that future Alliances should include 
Industrial Clouds and Platforms. A European Alliance for Industrial Data, Edge and 
Cloud would be launched in 2021 to facilitate the emergence of a European offering of next 
generation, trustwort hy, energy efficient and competitive cloud and edge services.  The 
European Council’s conclusions of 1 -2 October 2020 and the Member States joint declaration on 
cloud of October 2020, called for the creation of such an Alliance to strengthen Europe’s 
indust rial position in cloud and edge and foster cloud uptake. In this context, the Commission 
will also aim at creating synergies between national and cross -border initiatives, to enhance and 
broaden their scale and coverage.226 This would also increase the susta inable and competitive 
adoption of cloud by European businesses and public administrations, and increase access and 
choice for these professional users across the EU.  
In parallel, several Member States launched an open and inclusive process to jointly prep are with 
other interested Member States a possible Important Project of Common European interest 
(IPCEI)  focusing on next generation cloud and edge infrastructure and services.227 The 
                                                           
224 https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/news/towards -next-generation -cloud -europe 
225 Such as financial and accounting software applications, customer relationship management or to the use of 
computing power to run business applications.  
226 The Gaia -X initiative for “a European federated data infrastructure” is a leading example of a public -private 
initiative aiming at a broad European scope. Together with this, many Member States already have national cloud 
initiatives that can provide the basis for further cooperation.  
227 As part of Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the EU, on 17  December 2020 Germany held a high -level 
online event on Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs) during which it jointly with  France, Italy 
and Spain announced the intention to develop a possible IPCEI focusing on cloud and edge. Since then  the Member 
States participating in the preparatory work of this possible IPCEI organised several workshops for the public 
 
 
102 
 European Commission will accompany Member States in order to set this up i n accordance with 
the requirements in the IPCEI Communication.228  
Other EU investments on cloud will support the emergence of vivid data, computing and 
Artificial Intelligence ecosystems . EU investments for rolling out AI into all sectors of the 
economy, support advanced skills and maximise the availability of data through the deployment 
of common European data spaces, calls for capacities for secure hosting, access, sharing and use 
of da ta at scale across the EU . At the same time, it will stimulate the deployment of pan -
European cloud to edge data infrastructures and services. The 2018 Coordinated Plan on 
Artificial Intelligence points to the importance of deploying European data spaces a nd pan -
European computing infrastructure and cloud -services, especially given the international 
competition for access to data.  The new Data Governance Act229 will set the right enabling 
conditions for companies and individuals to voluntarily make their data  available for the wider 
common good and provide the framework for European data spaces. The future European 
Alliance for Industrial Data, Edge and Cloud will support connecting the building up of 
European data spaces with the rollout of pan -European cloud  to edge data infrastructures and 
services. This will contribute to the emergence of thriving and resilient European -grown data, 
computing and AI ecosystems, including small and medium enterprises.  
Finally, enhance access to fair, competitive and trustwort hy cloud solutions . Next to the 
supply side, EU investments through Digital Europe will also be directed at deployment on the 
market: the Commission intends to co -invest in setting up an EU online cloud marketplace , 
enabling EU customers with specific need s to access pre -approved cloud services. By Q2, 2022, 
an EU Cloud Rulebook  will create a comprehensive overview of a common set of EU rules and 
standards applicable to cloud services operating on the EU market.230 Such a compendium will 
provide legal certain ty to businesses and the public sector using cloud services, as well as raise 
the profile of those European providers meeting the requirements. The EU Cloud Rulebook will 
serve as a reference for services offered on the future EU online cloud marketplaces . To 
stimulate the public sector demand  and increase legal certainty, the Commission will also 
develop common requirements for public procurement of cloud services, in close cooperation 
with Member States authorities.  
  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
administration and industry participants, to gather their support and to shape the project further. The project is open 
for participa tion to all Member States.  
228 Communication from the Commission: Criteria for the analysis of the compatibility with the internal market of 
State aid to promote the execution of important projects of common European interest (2014/C 188/02)  
229 European Commi ssion, Proposal for a Regulation on European data governance (COM/2020/767 final).  
230 Areas of attention are: cybersecurity, energy efficiency, fair market practices (e.g. portability), data protection, 
business continuity and data sovereignty  
 
103 
 6 Conclusions  
This staff working document has highlighted the existence of possible strategic 
dependencies in some more sensitive ecosystems. A bottom -up (quantitative) mapping using 
external trade flows in goods across the more sensitive ecosystems as its starting poin t, shows the 
existence of certain dependencies notably in the energy intensive industries ecosystem (including 
raw/processed materials and chemicals), the health ecosystem (including active pharmaceutical 
ingredients and other health related products) as w ell as other inputs and products that are 
relevant to support the green and digital transformation. Furthermore, an assessment of the EU’s 
performance in advanced technologies shows strengths but also certain weaknesses (e.g. for 
cloud, semiconductors), hi ghlighting risks of possible (future) dependencies in this area 
emerging or further materialising. Finally, also internal dependencies may exist within the Single 
Market whereby the EU relies on a limited number of firms within the Single Market. Further 
discussion with Member States and industry will allow assessing the exact nature of identified 
dependencies in more detail.  
Any measures to address strategic dependencies would need to be tailored and 
proportionate based on a policy mix that considers the p otential of both external and 
internal actions. The assessment confirmed the need to intensify already ongoing efforts to 
identify and address strategic dependencies, including in the context of the Action Plan on 
Critical Raw Materials and the Raw Materia ls alliance, the Pharmaceuticals Strategy, the 
Chemicals Strategy as well as other specific actions with regard to key products or inputs 
necessary for the green and digital transformation (e.g. batteries, semi -conductors, hydrogen). 
Also concerning possib le dependencies in the area of advanced technologies, ongoing efforts can 
facilitate an important step forward, including investments and research under the Recovery and 
Resilience Facility and Digital Europe, the Horizon Europe programme, as well as recen t actions 
announced under the Digital Decade Communication and the Action plan on synergies between 
civil, defence and space industries (including the EU Observatory of Critical Technologies). 
IPCEIs and industrial alliances can also play important roles i n specific sectors, where proved 
well targeted, justified and efficient tools. Finally, regarding possible internal dependencies, a 
well-functioning Single Market and competition policy enabling strong business dynamics play 
an essential role by diversifyi ng sources of supply within the EU. Strong and diversified trade 
relationships and commercial partnerships with third countries also help to reduce any such 
internal dependencies.  
  
 
104 
 Annex  
FactSet’s database  
Firm level data on relationships between companies comes from FactSet’s Supply Chain 
Relationships database. The data covers listed and other major companies globally. Therefore, 
the dataset is not a census and it may underrepresent SMEs, but its coverage is sufficient to 
capture the major trends  in a given sector. The database records the existence of a link between a 
given pair of firms, but not the type of product of service traded. For each company, the most 
prominent customers, suppliers and partners are identified according to the informatio n disclosed 
in annual reports, press releases and other sources. As a result, relationships of smaller 
importance or magnitude may be kept out of the scope of the database. It is also possible to 
identify the areas of activity of a firm according to a deta iled FactSet Revere Business Industry 
Classification System (RBICS). The data use for the analysis does not control for ultimate 
ownership of corporate groups. Each company is given the nationality of its headquarters 
location. For some multinational group s this may imply that foreign subsidiary information and 
trade flows are assimilated to the mother company.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
