 
  The EU’s Open Strategic 
Autonomy from a central 
banking perspective  
Challenges to the monetary policy 
landscape from a changing geopolitical environment International Relations Committee 
Work stream on Open Strategic Autonomy  
No 311 / March  2023  
Disclaimer:  This paper should not be reported as representing the views of the European Central Bank (ECB) or 
the National Central Banks of the ESCB. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the ECB or  the National Central Banks of the ESCB.  
The EU’
s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – Contents  1 This r
eport has been produced by a work stream of the European System of Central Banks 
under the guidance of the International Relations Committee (IRC).  
Co-leads of
 the work stream  
Demosthenes Ioannou  
European Central Bank  Javier J. Pérez  
Banco de España  
Steeri
ng committee 
Hans Geeroms  
Nationale Bank van 
België/Banque Nationale  de 
Bélgique  Isabel Vansteenkiste  
European Central Bank  Pierre -François Web er 
Banque de France  
Sectio
n leads  
Ana M. Almeida  
Banco de Portugal  Iván Kataryniuk  
Banco de España  
All w
ork stream members 
Philippe Molitor 
European Central Bank  
Pauline Nég rin  
Banque de France 
Javier J. Pérez 
Banco de España  
Daniela Pulst 
Deutsche Bundesbank  
Michele Savini Zangrandi 
Banca d’Italia  
Felix Strobel 
Deutsche Bundesbank  
Jacopo Timini 
Banco de España  
Kalina Paula Tylko-T ylczynska 
European Central Bank  
Ilona van Schaik 
De Nederlandsche Bank  
Vilém Valenta 
European Central Bank  
Isabel Vansteenkiste 
European Central Bank  
Filippo Vergara Caffarelli  
Banca d’Italia   
Francesca Viani 
Banco de España
Natalja Viilmann 
Eesti Pank  
Pierre-François Weber 
Banque de France Ana M. Almeida 
Banco de P ortugal 
Daniel A lonso 
Banco de E spaña 
Maria Grazia Attinasi 
European Central B ank 
Irina Balteanu 
Banco de E spaña 
Lorenzo Bencivelli 
Banc a d’Italia 
Oscar Borgogno 
Banc a d’Italia 
Fructuoso B orrallo 
Banco de E spaña 
Kristel Buysse  
National e Bank v an 
België/Banque Nationale de 
Belgique 
Rodolfo Campos  
Banco de España  
Daragh C lancy 
Central Bank of I reland 
Lucía C uadro- Sáez 
Banco de E spaña 
Enrica Di S tefano 
Banca d'Italia 
Andreas Esser 
Deutsche B undesbank 
Dennis Essers  
National e Bank v an 
België/B anque Nationale de 
Belgique 
Donata Faccia 
European Central Bank 
Maximilian Freier 
European Central Bank Irina Balteanu 
Banco de Es paña  
María García-Lecuona 
Banco de España 
Hans Geeroms 
Banque Nationale de Bélgique  
Rinalds Gerinovics 
European Central Bank  
Maurizio Habib   
European Central Bank  
Demosthenes Ioannou 
European Central Bank  
Bruno-P hilippe Jeudy 
Banque de France  
Iván Kataryniuk 
Banco de España  
Makram Khalil 
Deutsche Bundesbank  
Patrick Kosterink  
De Nederlandsche Bank  
Andrés Lájer 
Banco de España  
Florian Le Gallo 
Banque de France  
Michele Mancini 
European Central Bank  
Marta Manrique 
Banco de España  
Ádám Martonosi 
Magyar Nemz eti Bank  
Peter McQuade 
European Central Bank  
Antonio Millaruelo 
Banco de Es paña  
Andrea Miola 
European Central Bank  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – Contents  
 2  
 Box contributors  
 
Box 1.1   
Box 2.3   
Box 3.3  
Maria Grazia Attinasi  
European Central Bank  Fructuoso Borrallo  
Banco de España  Lorenzo Bencivelli  
Banca d’Italia  
Andreas Esser  
Deutsche Bundesbank  Lucía Cuadro  
Banco de España  Oscar Borgogno  
Banca d’Italia  
 
Box 1.2  Antonio Millaruelo  
Banco de España  Michele Savini  
Banca d’Italia  
Francesca Viani  
Banco de España  Javier J. Pérez  
Banco de España   
Box 3.4  
 
Box 1.3   
Box 2.4  Patrick Kosterink  
De Nederlandsche Bank  
Felix Strobel  
Deutsche Bundesbank  Makram Khalil  
Deutsche Bundesbank   
Box 3.5  
 
Box 1.4 Felix Strobel  
Deutsche Bundesbank  Maximilian Freier  
European Central Bank  
Rodolfo Campos  
Banco de España   
Box 2.5   
Box 3.6  
Jacopo Timini  
Banco de España  Pauline Négrin  
Banque de France  Maximilian Freier  
European Central Bank  
 
Box 1.5  Florian Le Gallo  
Banque de France  Demosthenes Ioannou  
European Central Bank  
Marta Manrique  
Banco de España   
Box 3.1  Filippo Vergara Caffarelli  
Banca d’Italia  
Antonio Millaruelo  
Banco de España  Andrés Lájer  
Banco de España   
Box 4.1  
Demosthenes Ioannou  
European Central Bank  Francesca Viani  
Banco de España  Daragh Clancy  
Central Bank of Ireland  
 
Box 2.1   
Box 3.2  Vilém Valenta  
European Central Bank  
Francesca Viani  
Banco de España  Maria Grazia Attinasi  
European Central Bank   
Iván Kataryniuk  
Banco de España  Rinalds Gerinovics  
European Central Bank   
 
Box 2.2  Michele Mancini  
European Central Bank   
Dennis Essers  
Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de 
Belgique  Andrea Miola  
European Central Bank   
 
Secretarial support  
Victoria Fernández -Aransay  
Banco de España    
   
  
    Acknowledgements  
 This report has been produced by a work stream of the European System of Central Banks under the guidance of the International Relations Committee (IRC). We thank ECB Executive Board and General 
Council members for their reflections on this report, and mem bers of the IRC for their valuable 
comments and suggestions in earlier versions of the  report and/or in the context of internal seminars. 
In addition, we would like to thank Jakob Adolfsen, Pedro Bento, Constantinos Christoforides, Ettore Dorrucci, Massimo  Ferrari, Andrea Friedrich, Ángel Gavilán, Paul Hiebert, Iddo de Jong, Susanne 
Kretschmann, Arnaud Mehl, Jose M. Montero, Patrick Papsdorf, Hanni Schölermann, Fiona van Echelpoel, Beata Wrobel and Nico Zorell for their comments and suggestions on some part s of the 
report, and Benoit Lichtenauer for providing technical assistance.  The views expressed are those of 
the authors and all errors remain theirs.  
  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – Contents  
 3  
 Contents  
Abstract  5 
Non- technical summary  6 
1 Geopolitics, international economic relations and OSA  11 
Box 1.1  The challenges to the multilateral rule s-based trading system  19 
Box 1.2  Recent trends in trade globalisation  21 
Box 1.3  Are there any signs of the “friend- shoring” of GVCs? 26 
Box 1.4  The impact of geopolitical fragmentat ion on global trade 28 
Box 1.5  OSA: concept and EU legislative actions  30 
2 EU external dependencies  34 
2.1 Trade dependencies  34 
2.2 Energy dependencies  46 
2.3 Critical raw materials dependencies  51 
2.4 Digital transition  54 
2.5 Financial interdependencies  58 
2.6 Labour market and migration interdependencies  74 
Box 2.1 The methodology used in the analysis of trade dependencies  79 
Box 2.2 The semiconductor global value chain and the EU’s position  83 
Box 2.3 Food dependencies, food prices and the Common Agricultural 
Policy  86 
Box 2.4 The role of Chinese imports in Europe’s industry  91 
Box 2.5 The challenges of innovation financing in the EU  94 
3 Policy options and trade -offs 99 
3.1 Economic and financial trade- offs of current OSA policies  99 
3.2 Trade and financial sources of shocks and OSA  114 
3.3 Strengthening the EU and EMU and OSA  121 
Box 3.1 Digitalisation, sectoral spillovers and the role of value chains  129 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – Contents  
 4  
 Box 3.2 Domestic subsidies and trade t hrough the lens of a gravity 
model  132 
Box 3.3 Initiatives to protect the EU’s digital space  135 
Box 3.4 The international monetary system’s transition towards more 
multipolarity?  137 
Box 3.5 The contribution of Next Generation EU to the EU’s OSA goals  139 
Box 3.6 EU public goods and military spending  144 
4 Implications for monetary policy and other central bank tasks  154 
4.1 Changes in international trade and financial integration  154 
4.2 Economic and policy uncertainty  159 
Box 4.1 The macroeconomic implications of re- orientating global supply 
chains  160 
References  163 
 
 
 
T
he EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  5 Abstract 
Over the past decade, geopolitical developments – and the policy responses to these 
by major economies around the world – have challenged economic openness and the 
process of globalisation, with implications for the economic environment in which 
central banks operate. The return of war to Europe and the energy shock triggered by 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022  are the latest in a series of episodes that have 
led the E uropean Union (EU) to develop its Open Strategic Autonomy (OSA) agenda. 
This Report  is a broad attempt to take stock of these developments from a central 
banking perspective. It analyses the EU’s economic interdependencies and their 
implications for trade and finance, with a focus on strategically important dimensions 
such as energy, critical raw materials, food, foreign direct investment and financial 
market infrastructures. Against this bac kground, the Report discusses relevant 
aspec ts of the EU’s OSA policy agenda whic h extend to trade, indus trial and s tate 
aid measures, as well as EU  initiatives to strengthen and protect the internal market 
and further develop Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The paper highlights some 
of the policy choices and trade- offs that emerge in this context and possible 
implications for the ECB’s monetary policy and other policies.  
JEL codes: F 0, F10, F30, F 4, F5, F45, E 42, L5, Q 43 
Keywords : globalisation, geopolitics, geoeconomics, O pen Strategic  Autonomy, 
multilateralism, i nternational trade, c apital flows, industrial policy, global value 
chains, European C entral Bank, E uropean Economic and Monetary  Union, m onetary 
policy, f inancial stability, f inancial market infrastructures 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 6  
 Non-technical  summary  
Geopolitical factors affect the EU’s economy and the policies of central banks.  
Geopolitical considerations are playing an increasingly important role in determining 
international economic relations. This report is a first, broad attempt to provide a 
quantitative and qualitative analysis of how a changing geopolitical environment and 
the EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy (OSA)1 agenda may affect the EU in general and 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in particular, and the potential implications for 
the policies of the ECB and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB).   
Since the inception of the euro, the world has moved gradually from a 
dominant narrative favouring an open, multilateral international order to a 
narrative in which geopolitical considerations are having an increasing impact 
on the economy. This might be affecting the process of globalisation and the 
structure of the international economy, as discussed in Section 1. Geopolitical factors 
are increasingly influencing decision- makers, including those at the ECB. Central 
bankers in the EU and around the world are being called upon to deal with the 
repercussions of s trategic economic relations for macroeconomic variables, inflation 
dynamics, monetary policy, financial stability and market infrastructures.  
The change in narrative is gaining traction, despite the fact that the current 
open, multilateral rules- based syst em continues to be the engine of economic 
growth for much of the world’s population.  Multilateral institutions and rules are 
being tested by geopolitical competition against a background of changes in the economic weight of different countries and regions.  At the same time, political 
polarisation, social unrest and within- country wealth inequality
2 are rising in many 
parts of the world, leading in some cases to a questioning of the open- based 
multilateral system. There is also a significant policy and academic debate underway 
as to whether the international economy is following a trend towards “de-
globalisation”. Existing evidence appears to indicate that, at least for the time being, 
there is no such consistent trend, but rather a change in the nature of globalisation, 
which is leading to a rise in the regionalisation of trade and a certain slowdown in 
global value chain (GVC) integration and the international trade in goods. At the 
same time, the growth of international trade in services seems to be signal ling a 
continuation of globalisation trends in those sectors spurred on by technological 
developments. Some of these phenomena might, to some extent, be a result of 
geopolitical factors. This changing nature of globalisation is being determined not 
 
1   More recently, the EU Council, in its conclusions of 29 March 2022 on the EU’s economic and financial 
strategic autonomy, emphasised that  “the EU needs to contin ue pursuing an appropriate balance 
between both objectives, striving to achieve its economic and financial autonomy, while maintaining its 
openness, global cooperation with like -minded partners and competitiveness, and reap the potential 
benefits thereof.”  
2   As argued in  Box 5 of the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on globalisation , 2021), even though over 
the past three decades there has been a steady fall in inequality worldwide across  countries, inequality 
within  countries (notably in some advanced economies) has increased markedly. Globalisation is often 
seen as one of the key forces driving the rise in inequality in advanced economies, although this effect 
cannot easily be disentangled from the effects of technological progress. Moreover, countries exposed 
to similar degrees of trade and financial openness and technological change hav e exhibited different 
trends in inequality.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 7  
 only by  public policies, but also by private business initiatives and interests seeking 
to respond to these changing economic conditions in a context of heightened 
economic uncertainty and a perception that geopolitical shocks are occurring more 
frequently.  
The E U contributes to and benefits from global economic, trade and financial 
openness but, almost by definition, openness guided primarily by economic comparative advantage has a flipside, namely (inter)dependence.  Section 2 of 
this report provides a thorough empirical analysis of the EU’s trade, financial and 
labour supply interlinkages with the rest of the world. The section documents the 
extent to which the EU and the euro area’s economy and financial system are deeply 
intertwined with those of major geopolit ical powers. Interdependence is high with the 
United States and the United Kingdom in terms of both finance and trade,
3 with 
China in terms of trade and with Russia in terms of energy and critical raw materials 
(CRMs), despite the recent action taken by t he EU to reduce its dependency on 
Russia following the latter’s invasion of Ukraine. While this interdependence is an advantage in a first -best, rules -based, comparative- advantage world — for example 
through GVC participation, seeking the most efficient suppliers or allowing foreign 
financial players to operate freely in the domestic market — it can also turn into a 
vulnerability in a second- best, increasingly “geopolitical” world.  
The EU’s OSA agenda is an emerging set of regulatory, structural and fiscal  
policies seeking to address the EU’s economic vulnerabilities arising from 
geopolitical factors.  These include different types of policies such as those 
affecting the configuration of GVCs, foreign direct investment (FDI) screening, as 
well as policies ai med at increasing the resilience of financial market infrastructures, 
promoting the international role of the euro and designing efficient sanctioning 
regimes. As discussed in Section 3, there may be trade- offs between these and 
other policy priorities whi ch may also induce (new) dependencies. Some examples 
from the analysis set out in this report are as follows.  
(i) A reshoring or friend- shoring of GVCs decreases the impact of foreign supply 
shocks and reduces external dependence, although it may increase exposure 
to domestic disruptions and amplify the impact of domestic shocks.  
(ii) FDI screening may be necessary to protect strategic sectors from foreign 
buyers but it may also reduce the availability and efficiency of capital 
allocation, especially if it is uncoordinated within the Single Market.  
(iii) Reorienting trade towards reliable partners that respect an open, multilateral 
trade order may imply higher costs and prices, with implications for domestic 
inflation and monetary policy. This is especially relevant for  the energy sector 
and CRMs.  
 
3    Beyond purely economic and financial considerations, external security represents a very important 
interdependence between the United State and Europe, both within a NATO context and beyond. An 
analysis of this interdependence and its implications are outside the scope of this report.    
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 8  
 (iv) Greater reliance on domestic payment and other financial infrastructures may 
imply less vulnerability to foreign providers but needs to be met with 
appropriate measures to ensure continued competition and innovation.  
A number  of these policy choices and trade- offs are beyond the remit of the ECB but 
are likely to affect the landscape in which it operates.  
In the EU, developments in the area of strategic autonomy are also relevant to the debate on strengthening the EU and EMU,  while the increasing 
significance of geopolitics requires further coordinated EU policy action. The 
appropriate deepening of EMU and further economic integration in the EU are integral to any attempt to increase resilience and competitiveness and enable t he EU 
to speak with one voice in a more complex world economy. Ambitious EU and 
national reforms could help increase resilience and reduce vulnerabilities to 
geopolitical shocks. In line with the position adopted by the ECB Governing Council,
4 
material advances in the capital markets union and the banking union agendas could 
contribute to reducing constraints in EU/EMU financial markets and the banking 
sector. The Single Market and the EU trade policy have shown that there are 
advantages in speaking with one voice vis -à-vis external partners. Closer and more 
effective coordination of other policies, for example in the energy sector through 
better interconnectedness of EU energy infrastructures or in energy negotiations with 
partners outside the EU, illustrate the benefits of such an approach.5 In addition, 
strengthening the international role of the euro could enhance the euro area’s 
strategic autonomy in economic and financial matters while preserving an open 
economy. Safe assets denominated in euro in the form of national government debt 
or common EU/euro area- issued debt could further support this process.  
The more significant role played by geopolitics and OSA -type policies is likely 
to influence inflation dynamics, price- setting mechanisms, productivity , 
competition and the natural interest rate, thereby affecting the landscape in which the ECB operates. More frequent geopolitical shocks and OSA -type policies 
may imply costs and second- best solutions that the ECB needs to take into account. 
Section 4 foc uses on the impact of these developments on the ECB’s policies. A 
retrenchment of globalisation could lead to a regionalisation of trade flows and value 
chains, an increase in reshoring initiatives, a reduction in international labour mobility 
and/or an intensification of industrial policies that seek to encourage the local production of goods considered strategic. These dynamics could affect inflation 
directly in both the short and the medium term by substituting cheaper inputs with 
more expensive but “saf er” ones, and indirectly through their impact on competition 
and market structure, price- setting mechanisms and workers' bargaining power. The 
dynamics impact productivity, which is a critical variable in the determination of the natural rate of interest. At the same time, efforts to diversify imports may result in 
lower dependencies on some countries, which may have a positive effect on global 
 
4   See Eurosystem (2021). The Eurosystem’s position is that “Completing Economic and Monetary Union 
remains essential to strengthen the euro area’s shock absorption capacity. This includes the completion 
of the banking union and capital markets union. In addition,  a permanent central fiscal capacity, if 
appropriately designed, could play a role in enhancing macroeconomic stabilisation and convergence in the euro area in the longer run.”  
5   See, for example, McWilliams et al.  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 9  
 interest rates, given that the savings of these countries have played an important 
role in depressing global inter est rates. Section 4 also shows that GVCs can amplify 
shocks in the economy as they move up and down the production network and 
change the slope of the Phillips curve. Moreover, shocks to central nodes, as well as 
shocks to suppliers of CRMs, tend to gener ate higher economic and price 
fluctuations through strong spillover effects. In addition, OSA -like policies that target 
near-shoring or reshoring could foster either economic convergence or economic 
divergence across EU/euro area countries, with potential implications for the 
transmission of monetary policy. In the particular case of energy, the greening of the 
economy makes it possible to reduce dependencies but this requires time and 
introduces elements that impact inflation, inflation volatility and relative prices within 
the energy mix.  
Geopolitically -induced shocks of a transitory nature may blur the picture for 
monetary policy by increasing uncertainty. More frequent geopolitical shocks 
have the potential to increase output and inflation volatility, which may generate 
persistent dynamics that, even if transitory, could pose a challenge to the conduct of monetary policy, its communication and its transmission.  
Geopolitical factors could also impact capital and financial flows
6 and the 
smooth functionin g of payment and financial market infrastructures, thus 
posing risks to financial stability.  The euro area is more financially open than 
other major strategic players and is also home to a number of major investment 
hubs. Nevertheless, a number of elements  (such as the prominent role of offshore 
centres or complex multinational entities in intermediating FDI and portfolio flows) 
blur the picture of the ultimate investor -destination linkages and make it difficult to 
map financial exposures. With regard to fi nancial market infrastructures, the current 
overreliance of EU market participants on third- country payment and clearing 
services, with the EU authorities having only limited reach in a crisis situation, is a potential source of financial stability risks.  
Economic and financial openness has been a boon for the EU/euro area economy.  Thus, it is important to guide the OSA strategy in a way that will allow 
Europe to continue to reap the economic and social benefits of globalisation, while at 
the same time prot ecting it from the challenges of a tenser geopolitical world. From 
this perspective, the case for OSA -type policies should be sufficiently scrutinised, 
especially for those initiatives of a structural nature which could introduce distortions and increase economic policy uncertainty if not well defined. Against this 
background, and given that in at least some cases the search for strategic autonomy 
might imply a second- best solution to an openness based on pure comparative 
advantage, the EU’s defence of an open, multilateral rules -based system is still the 
first-best option.  
 
 
6   For the sake of simplicity, for the remainder of the text we will use the term “capital flows” to refer to 
both capital and financial flows, the latter including direct, portfolio and other investments, as defined in 
the IMF’s Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual, 6th edition.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 10  
  
  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 11  
 1 Geopolitics, international economic 
relations and OSA  
Until recently, the world was undergoing a process of increasing 
multilateralism and globalisation.  The bulk of globalisation in trade and financial 
flows took place in a favourable geopolitical environment. Two favourable milestones 
were the lifting of the Iron Curtain and the incorporation of China into the World 
Trade Organisation (WTO) (see Box 1.1).  
In this context the EU — an d the euro area in particular — achieved significant 
levels of economic openness and integration with the rest of the world. Euro 
area trade in goods and services had reached 95% of GDP by the end of 2021 (see Chart 1, panel a, which includes flows between members). Excluding intra- euro area 
flows, trade still reached 54% of euro area output, compared with 26% in the case of the United States. The EU has been instrumental in promoting global rules and 
common standards. According to mainstream economic theor y, open trade and 
finance, driven by comparative advantage, improves the allocation of resources and 
maximises economic efficiency, resulting – all things being equal – in higher growth 
and employment for all economies involved. Despite the gains made by t he EU from 
openness, its share of world GDP has fallen over time, with the direct consequence that economic developments in the rest of the world have assumed greater 
significance.
7 In particular, emerging market economies (EMEs) have become much 
more prominent in world GDP in a relatively short period of time (see Chart 1, panel 
b). 
The process of globalisation has been hindered by geopolitical 
considerations, which are becoming an increasingly important determinant of 
economic relations.8 Multilateralism and its institutions are being increasingly 
replaced by regionalisation and bilateral trade agreements (see Box 1.1). Trade 
disruptions and economic policy uncertainty shocks have become more frequent, 
while political polarisation, social unrest, conflict and geopolitical risk have also been 
on the rise in a significant number of countries with cross -border spillovers9 (see 
Chart 2). These trends are affecting the EU’s major economic partners, including the United States and China. These two countries are, respectively, the most important 
financial and trade partners of the euro area (see Section 2), with the United States 
also central to the EU’s external security and China arguably the largest geopolitical 
 
7    See, for example, Lane  (2019) and the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on globalisation , 2021).  
8    See, for example, Lagarde  (2022a and 2022b) and Yellen  (2022).  
9    See, for example, Ghirelli et al.  (2021), Diakonova et al.  (2022a), Diakonova et al.  (2022b), Mueller 
and Rauh  (2022), and the references quoted therein. This branch of the literature shows how different 
measures of institutional instability, including economic policy uncertainty, political polarisation, social 
unrest and conflict, have a significant negative bearing  on macroeconomic and financial outcomes. In 
addition, shocks of this type in some countries and regions impinge on other countries through trade and financial exposures. Caldar a and Iacoviello  (2022) analysed the trend towards rising geopolitical 
risk using a geopolitical risk index (GPR Index). They provide evidence that this is having an impact on 
investment and employment and increasing downside risks.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 12  
 and economic power after the United States, with a permanent seat on the United 
Nations Security Council.10 
Chart 1  
Key globalisation trends  
a) Trade openness  b) Con tributions of different regions to world 
GDP  
(percentage of euro area and world GDP)  (percentages, at market exchange rates)  
 
 
Sources: World Penn Tables, World Bank, Eurostat, World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) and IMF World Economic 
Outlo ok. 
Notes: The black line indicates the global financial crisis (GFC). Trade openness is defined as the sum of imports and exports divided 
by GDP. Euro area total series include extra and intra -euro area trade. In panel (a), the latest observations are 2021 for euro area 
trade and 2020 for world trade. In panel (b), world GDP is taken as the total for all the countries included in the WDI database.  
A weaker narrative in support of multilateralism might also reflect a reordering 
of the global balance of power. Some countries are becoming increasingly 
concerned with maintaining or improving their economic and geopolitical status relative to other competing areas and countries, even to the detriment of preserving free trade and the ensuing benefits for their own economies.
11  
From a European perspective, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 is 
the starkest example of the potentially severe consequences of geopolitical 
disruptions.  It has led, among other things, to an unprecedented degree of 
economic and financial sanctions being imposed, such as the exclusion of Russian 
banks from SWIFT, the freezing of the country’s financial assets (including central 
bank reserves) and the halting of trade in key raw materials and agricultural 
products. It has required the EU – at considerable cost – to drastically reduce its 
 
10    These developments  have given rise to a new theme of “geoeconomics” which merges geopolitical    
and economic goals. See, for example, Schmucker (2021).  
11    The trade liberalisatio n of the 1990s was spurred on by subsiding geopolitical rivalries following the 
demise of the Soviet Union. As several countries started to embrace the principles of a democratic, 
market -based system, trade integration became a way to achieve economic convergence in per 
capita incomes across countries which was expected, in turn, to strengthen political convergence. However, according to some observers, persisting political divergence led to an erosion of mutual trust between countries. The perception that trade liberalisation could, overall, be a positive- sum 
game (even if some countries might benefit more from trade liberalisation than others) gave way to the perception that it is a zero- sum game. According to this scenario, actors became more concerned 
with the distribution of existing economic and political power than with creating and sharing new 
wealth ( Felbermayr , 2020). On the shifts  of global power and the economic and governance 
implications for Europe more generally see, for example, European Commission  2022a , Layne 
(2012), WZB  (2021), Graaf and Lesage (2015).  0102030405060708090100
1980 1990 2000 2010 2020Hyper -globalisationRetrenchment
or 
ReshapingWorld Trade
Euro area (extra)
Euro area (total)
020406080100
1990 2003 2021United States
Euro area
Other advanced economies
Emerging economies
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 13  
 dependence on Russia, given the latter’s “weaponisation” of its role as the EU’s main 
energy provider.  
Chart 2  
Different dimensions of geopolitical risk  
a) World uncertainty index  b) Trade policy uncertainty  
(GDP weighted average)  (United States and China)  
  
c) Social unrest (IMF index, global)  d) Geopolitical risk index  
(Number of unrest events)  (Index)  
  
Sources: International Monetary Fund and the Economic Policy Uncertainty Index . 
Notes: The world uncertainty index is computed by counting the percentage of the word “uncertain” or its variants in the Economist 
Intelligence Unit country reports, according to Ahir et al. (2022). The trade policy uncertainty index reflects the frequency of articles in newspapers that discuss economic policy uncertainty and also contain references to trade policy, following the Baker et al . (2016) 
methodology. The frequency of unrest events is the number of countries that report unrest events, according to Barrett et al . (2020). 
The geopolitical risk index of Caldara and Iacoviello ( 2022 ) uses a textual analysis of printed articles in English -language newspapers.  
This is the latest episode in a series of geopolitical events leading to economic 
disruption.  These include US -China trade and technology tensions since 2018, the 
US Administration’s abandonment of the Iran agreement in 2018 and the United States’ extraterritorial legal reach affecting EU banks in that case, China and the United States challenging the EU’s sovereignty over its digital policy (e.g. 5G 
telecommunications and data privacy rules), China’s purchase of European firms 
and infrastructure of key strategic importance (e.g. robotics and ports), the threat to impose sanctions on European firms  following geopolitical disagreements, the war in 010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,000
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020Uncertainty
Mean 1990SMean 2000S
Mean 2010S
05001, 0001, 5002, 0002, 500
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021China
United States
0102030405060
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 20170100200300400500600
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 14  
 Syria and disagreements over the migration crisis, uncertainty over the 
implementation of the Iran nuclear deal, tensions over Taiwan and the geopolitics of 
decarbonisation.12  
Third countries’ economic pol icies have become less predictable, affecting an 
economic landscape which has been uncertain since the GFC.  Geopolitical 
tensions and the uncertainty these induce could thus change the environment in which monetary policy operates.  The EU finds itself in t he middle of significant 
– and potentially rising – geopolitical tensions between the United States, China and 
Russia, with the first two competing both geopolitically and economically.
13 These 
tensions come amidst the twin transitions of climate change and digitalisation, which 
in themselves have implications for energy and CRMs. Geopolitical tensions can 
have notable consequences, not only for peace and security but also for economic 
developments, especially in the areas of trade (including energy and key  raw 
materials) and finance (including financial market infrastructures).14  
The rising importance of geopolitical shocks has led to a debate over the trend 
and nature of globalisation, in particular whether the international economy is 
on a “de -globalisat ion” trend which would imply, among other things, a 
reduction in international trade and the reshoring or friend- shoring of GVCs. 
While the marked slowdown in firms’ decisions concerning the relocation abroad of a part of their production processes (offshoring) or the rise in repatriations of previously offshored activities (reshoring) suggest that a de- globalisation phase may 
be imminent, this view is qualified by a number of other factors.
15 The levelling off of 
trade in goods rather hints at a “slowbalis ation” phenomenon, while the continued 
growth of international trade in services seems to signal a continuation of 
globalisation trends in sectors driven by technological progress.16 It appears that for 
the time being there is no consistent trend towards “ de-globalisation”, but instead a 
change in the nature of globalisation, leading to a rise in the regionalisation of trade 
(e.g. within the EU or between Asia- Pacific countries) and a certain slowdown in 
GVC participation. This changing nature of globalisat ion is being determined not only 
by public policies but also by private business initiatives and interests, which are seeking to respond to changing framework conditions arising from national and 
global policy changes. An overview of the globalisation debate and key stylised facts 
are provided in Box 1.2. In addition, Box 1.3 provides empirical evidence that the 
process of regionalisation of GVCs caused, for example, by geopolitical risk is still 
weak. The box explains that US imports of GVC -related goods f rom countries with 
similar UN voting behaviour to the United States have not outpaced GVC -related 
imports from countries more closely aligned with China. A difference- in-difference 
 
12    See Adelphi Research  (2020).  
13    This also has the potential to lead to (proxy) war(s) between the main global powers – see Allison  
(2017).  
14    The latest developments come on top of China’s rise over the past two decades as a geopolitical 
power, one of the world’s largest economies and the second -largest trading block after the EU. Other 
developments include the rising economic size and geopolitical role of emerging economies more 
broadly and the parallel relat ive shrinking of the EU in terms of world GDP , trade, finance, population 
(growth) and technological advancement. This is even more the case for (even the biggest) individual EU Member States. 
15    See Antràs  (2021).  
16    See Blázquez et al.  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 15  
 approach shows that there is only weak evidence for a shift of US GVC -impor t 
shares in recent years to US -aligned countries.  
In an extreme – although for the time being hypothetical – scenario, the world 
could become divided along geopolitical lines, resulting in a “bad -for-all” 
fragmentation of the global economy into blocs.  This would affect not only trade 
in goods and services but also the mobility of persons and the flow of technologies, 
innovation and ideas. According to the literature, the impact of fragmentation on 
trade and welfare would be considerable (see Box 1.4).  
A narrative that questions the open -based multilateral system is also gaining 
traction within many advanced economies, including some in the EU, on the grounds of income and wealth inequality in certain countries. Even though 
there has been a steady fall in i nequality worldwide (across countries) over the past 
three decades, inequality within  countries (notably in some advanced economies) 
has increased markedly, as lower and middle- income individuals’ incomes have 
stagnated in relative terms when compared with those of the better off. In particular, 
inequality has increased in the euro area (although it remains well below that of the 
United States) after accounting for redistribution (see Chart 3). Globalisation is often seen as one of the key forces driving the rise in inequality in advanced economies, 
through competitive pressures exerted on low -skilled workers and their wages and 
the enhanced role of offshoring in advanced economies in recent decades. One problem with this narrative is that the incidence of g lobalisation on income inequality 
cannot easily be disentangled from the effects of technological progress and the fact that international experience demonstrates that countries exposed to similar degrees of trade and financial openness and technological c hange have shown different 
trends in inequality.
17 
The new geopolitical environment might have a direct impact on inflation trends in the euro area, the EU and around the globe and pose new challenges for key central bank policy areas such as financial sta bility, payment systems 
and banking supervision. For example, the shock of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has contributed to the build- up of the highest short -term inflation rates in decades. 
Central banks and governments have acted to address these shocks and dampen 
their impact and will probably need to remain highly alert to such tensions going 
forward.
18  
In this context, the openness that until recently had been largely regarded as one of the uncontested strengths of the EU could, in a number of cases, t urn 
into a source of vulnerability, amplifying the transmission of exogenous, 
geopolitical shocks.  This is because a large portion of the euro area economy is 
reliant on the smooth international exchange of goods, services and capital, coupled 
with substantial energy and technological dependence, among other issues. In 
 
17    For additional arguments and references see Box 5 in the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on 
globalisation , 2021).  
18    More broadly, although this is contested, the longer -term ebb and flow of globalisation has been 
presented as a key determinant of inflation dynamics ( James , 2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 16  
 addition, more frequent, larger geopolitical shocks would be likely to affect different 
EU regions asymmetrically.  
Chart 3  
Trends in inequality within and across countries  
a) Inequality measures in the EU and 
worldwide  b) Euro area and the United States  
(index)  (index)  
  
Sources: Box 5 in the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on globalisation , 2021), Darvas  (2019) and World Bank.  
Notes: The within- coun tries index is computed as a weighted average of country -level Gini coefficients using GDP purchasing power 
parity (PPP) shares as weights. The across -country Gini index is computed as explained in Darvas (2019): a world income distribution 
is calculated using country -level income distributions which are estimated based on two parameters assuming log- normal income 
distributions at the country level across the world. Gini Market is pre- tax; Gini Net is post -tax. The latest observation is for 2017 (2016 
for W orld Gini).  
The concept of OSA has become increasingly relevant and now includes a debate over the EU’s ability to act autonomously while maintaining its 
openness. This is also relevant for the ECB.  Strategic autonomy refers to the 
ability of a state to defend its sovereignty, pursue its interests and adopt its preferred 
(foreign) policies without being too dependent on foreign states or having its policies 
influenced or even manipulated by other foreign states. The EU’s policymakers see 
strategic autonomy as the Union’s “capacity to act autonomously when and where necessary and with partners wherever possible”.
19 While the concept derives from 
(and is related to) foreign and security policy, it is linked with (increasingly in recent years) the economy and international economic relations (see Box 1.5).  
Several policy actions have been undertaken or announced under the OSA “umbrella”. Beyond the foreign and security dimension, examples in the economic 
and financial sphere include the identification of CRMs, measures to strengthen 
energy security, the screening of inward FDI and increasing the resilience of domestic financial markets. In general, however, a significant number of initiatives are still under development (see Box 1.5).  
In the EU, developments in the context of strategic autonomy are also related to the debate over strengthening the EU and EMU.  Individual Member States 
might not be economically or geopolitically powerful enough to achieve desirable 
 
19    See Council of the European Union (2016a).  3035404550556065
28303234363840
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015EU Gini Net within (left -hand scale)
World Gini Net within (left -hand scale)
EU Gini Net across (right -hand scale)
World Gini Net across (right -hand scale)
23283338434853
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010EA Gini Net within
EA Gini Market within
US Gini Net within
US Gini Market within
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 17  
 elements of open autonomy by themselves in a globalised environment and some of 
the issues discussed previously can only be addressed through common action 
undertaken by all Member States. Moreover, where strategic autonomy touches on 
policy areas of exclusive or shared EU competence and derives from the strength 
and resilience of the EU/EMU economy as a whole, the policy response must come 
through common action undertaken in the context of the EU/EMU. Thus, beyond 
trade policy per se, the need for more strategic autonomy is related to several 
discussions and initiatives in areas such as industrial policy and state aid, as well as 
the need to tap the potential of the internal market in general and strengthen EMU in 
particular. The latter will require concrete and substantial advances in the capital 
markets union and the banking union and an appropriately designed, permanent 
fiscal capacity.20 The Russian invasion of Ukraine has forced the EU to take 
measures with regard to energy and agricultural policies, which has further modified 
the EU’s approach to OSA and could have a lasting effect on economic growth and 
inflation.  
The aim of this report is to provide a first attempt to examine the direct and 
indirect consequences of this new environment for the ECB’s monetary (and 
other) policies.  In this environment,  several features may gain prominence: (i) 
geopolitical shocks may become more frequent, (ii) the authorities may undertake 
policy actions that alter the open- economy paradigm of recent decades, (iii) the 
smooth functioning of EMU may be affected and, most  relevant to this report (iv) the 
medium -term economic analysis performed by the ECB and the Eurosystem might 
need to incorporate new elements and analytical tools, most notably for the study of 
inflation dynamics, monetary policy and its transmission and the potential impact on 
other central bank policy areas such as financial stability and payment systems. 
Thus, while OSA is not a direct goal of the ESCB, it is directly relevant for the 
economic environment in which it operates. In some cases, it is also directly relevant 
for the primary mandate of the Eurosystem/ESCB, as well as for some of its key 
principles, such as economic openness (Article 119 of the Treaty on the Functioning 
of the European Union, TFEU) and its competences, such as payment systems and 
financial stability (Article 127 TFEU).  
This report reviews euro area (and EU) exposures in the areas of trade (goods and 
services including digitalisation, energy and raw materials), financial flows and 
regulatory changes (Section 2). It looks at such exposures not only as a source of 
prosperity but also as a potential source of vulnerability in a world in which more 
frequent and ever -larger geopolitical shocks are occurring. Section 3 of the report 
reviews the possible trade- offs introduced by policies  intending to achieve OSA 
against the potential cost of limiting openness based on comparative advantage or introducing domestic distortions. It also illustrates how the further strengthening of 
EU/EMU could be instrumental in increasing the resilience of the EU economy. 
 
20    See Eurosystem (2021)  for the Governing Council’s position. With regard to strengthening EMU in 
particular: “Completing Economic and Monetary Union remains essential to strengthen the euro 
area’s shock absorption capacity. This includes  the completion of the banking union and capital 
markets union. In addition, a permanent central fiscal capacity, if appropriately designed, could play a role in enhancing macroeconomic stabilisation and convergence in the euro area in the longer run.”  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 18  
 Finally, Section 4 discusses the (possible) implications of the changing geopolitical 
environment for the macroeconomy, monetary policy and other central bank tasks.  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 19  
 Box 1 .1  
The challenges to the multilateral rules -based trading system  
The multilateral rules -based trading system embedded in the WTO has been the cornerstone of 
trade integration since the Second World War.21 The WTO  was created as a forum for negotiating 
and operating a global system of trade rules (defined in multilateral trade agreements) and settling 
trade disputes between its members. These common rules are inspired by the principles of “non-discrimination”, meaning that a country should not discriminate between its trading partners (but 
should give them equally “most -favoured- nation” status) and “national treatment”, meaning that it 
should not discriminate between its own and foreign products, services or nationals. Several rounds 
of trade negotiations led to a large- scale reduction of tariffs and non- tariff barriers and a strong rise 
in international trade, spurring globalisation.  
Despite its significant achievements in reducing tariffs and non- tariff barriers (since the early 1990s 
average tariffs have declined considerably, from around 15% to 5%
22) the WTO has had a mixed 
track record in recent years  as regards fulfilling its mandate. Trade negotiations on key dossiers 
have stalled and the Doha round launched in 2001 has not yet been formally concluded. While 
pursuing an ambitious agenda aimed at modernising and broadening global trade rules, the WTO’s 164 members have found it difficult to reach consensus in a number of important areas (such as 
fisheries subsidies and flexibility for developing countries). Moreover, the functioning of another 
important pillar of the WTO, namely the dispute settlement mechanism, has been impaired since  
2019, given that the WTO  Appellate Body is unable to review appeals because of deadlock over the 
appointment of new judges.
23 As a result, trade negotiations between pairs or groups of countries 
are increasingly being managed outside the consensus -based decisi on-making process of the 
WTO. Recent decades have seen a proliferation of regional/bilateral trade agreements (RTAs), 
including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)/United States -Mexico -Canada Agreement (USMCA), which have increased in 
number from around 80 in 2000 to more than 300 in 2022.24 More recently, in December 2017 a 
group of WTO countries decided to move towards plurilateral negotiations and launched the Joint 
Statement Initiative (JSI) with the aim of progressing negotiations or discussions related to issues of increasing relevance to the world trading system. The ultimate goal  of the JSIs is to strengthen and 
reinforce the multilateral trading system. They are open to all WTO members and offer a mechanism which facilitates cooperation without all WTO members having to agree to participate.
25 
This proliferation of regional and plurilateral initiatives reflects in part the need for deeper integration 
than that achieved by multilateral agreements so far and in part the need to overcome the impasse 
 
21    The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was established in 1948 in the form of a multilateral 
trade agreement. In 1995 it was transformed into a fully fledged international organisation with the 
creation of the WTO.  
22    See European Central Bank  (2021a).  
23    To overcome the impasse arising from the US Administration’s stance, in March 2020 47 WTO 
member states, including the EU and China, created a new Multi -Party Interim Appeal Arbitration 
Arrangement (MPIA) as a temporary mechanism for arbitrating any WT O disputes among 
themselves which would otherwise be appealed to the non- functional WTO Appellate Body. The 
MPIA founding members are committed to resolving the impasse at the WTO Appellate Body and to ceasing operation of the MPIA as soon as the Body is f unctional once again.  
24    See Regional trade agreements and the WTO .  
25    The JSIs are open to all WTO members and encourage as many members as possible to participate. 
So far,  four JSIs have been launched in the following areas: e -commerce, investment facilitation for 
development, services domestic regulation and micro, small and medium -sized enterprises.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 20  
 in the decision- making process at WTO ministerial conferences.26 Nonetheless, the 12th Ministerial 
Conference (MC12) in June 2022 marked an significant turning point as an agreement was reached 
in a number of important areas such as fisheries subsidies, WTO  reform, pandemic preparedness, 
food security and e- commerce. The MC12 also reached an agreement on the prohibition of 
subsidies contributing to illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing.27 On WTO reform, 
ministers launched a process of concrete reform which included the restoration of a functioning dispute settlement system. The aim was for results to be achieved by the 13th Ministerial Conference, which is to be convened between December 2023 and March 2024.  
In tandem with a move towards bilateral/plurilateral agreements, there has been an increase in 
protectionist/isolationist interventions in recent years, which poses an existential threat to the 
multilateral trading system (see Section 1). In this new environment, countries have started to 
demand stronger protection from unfair trading practices (a need to establish and enforce a level 
playing field)  and to seek ways to reduce asymmetric dependencies in strategic sectors (a need for 
security) . Faced with challenges for which the WTO’s rulebook no longer appears suited, countries 
have started to take unilateral action aimed at achieving security in strategic sectors and securing 
protection against unfair trade practices.  
Among the world’s largest trading powers, these actions have recently led to specific initiatives such as the EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy (see Box 1.5 in this report), the US initiative aimed at building 
resilient supply c hains  and China’s  dual circulation strategy . In the United States, the Administration 
is looking into ways to improve supply chain resilience in the aftermath of the coronavirus (COVID -
19) pandemic. A task force, mandated to investigate the issue, provided some recommendations 
focused in particular on the manufacturing of semiconductors, large capacity batteries, critical 
minerals and materials and pharmaceuticals and active pharmaceutical ingredients. The task force suggested a two- pronged approach. First, it stressed the importance of increased international 
cooperation in fostering supply chain resilience. Second, the task force recommended that the US 
Government play a more direct role in strengthening the United States’ industrial base by making use, for example, of financial instruments such as production incentives, loans and subsidies. As for 
China’s dual circulation strategy, its first objective is to insulate China’s domestic market from the 
rest of the world. To this end, China aims to achieve independence in terms of natural resources 
and technology, which will allow it to vertically integrate its production and achieve self -reliance 
thanks to its huge domestic market. Its second goal is to boost external demand through open markets in the emerging world. The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) is fully part of this goal. What these initiatives have in common is that they call for the more active us e of industrial policy 
supported by stronger government intervention in sectors deemed strategic from a national security standpoint, including those related to climate change. An example of this type of intervention in the EU is the European Chips Act (see Box 2.2 in this report).  
While the multilateral rules -based trading system has yielded undeniable benefits in terms of 
poverty reduction and improved living standards across the globe, it is now facing an existential 
threat. Under the current circumstances, the chances of a return to big multilateral trade deals or 
the full restoration of the WTO’s judicial system appear remote. However, given the gains derived 
 
26     In many RTAs, negotiations go beyond tariffs to cover multiple pol icy areas that affect trade and 
investment in goods and services, including behind -the-border regulations such as competition 
policy, government procurement rules and intellectual property rights. These RTAs are known as 
“deep” agreements, in contrast to “ shallow” agreements that cover tariffs and other border measures 
only. 
27     For this agreement to enter into force negotiations on the corresponding UN Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG 14.6) will need to be concluded.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 21  
 from globalisation so far, the international community could lose out significantly in terms of 
development and prosperity if it turned its back on global cooperation and dialogue as a means of 
finding joint solutions to the challenges facing an open international economic order. Baldwin and Grozoubinski (2022) are among those arguing in favour of infusing the WTO with renewed political 
support in order to rise to today’s global challenges. In particular, the WTO could play an important 
role with regard to climate- related policies and their trade implications (e.g. the WTO could act as a 
forum in which countries could have transparent discussions of new and planned environmental 
policies impacting trade) as well as digitalisation (e.g. how to amend the existing rulebook to 
account for the growing relevance of international trade in services).  
Box 1. 2  
Recent trends in trade globalisation  
Despite the collapse in global trade flows because of the COVID -19 health crisis, international trade 
had returned to its pre- pandemic levels by the end of 2020. However, some analysts claim that the 
pandemic, and the subsequent global shocks on supply chains, might have a long- lasting impact on 
trade globalisation as it could lead to the relocation of firms’ activities and the reorganisation of GVCs. It should be noted, nonetheless, that these trends are part of larger -scale, pre- pandemic 
processes encompassing the crisis of the WTO multilateral framework (see Box 1.1) and the 
slowdown in goods trade observed in the aftermath of the GFC – tendencies that generated an 
extensive debate over the recent evolution of trade globalisation. This box presents the main 
elements of this debate and illustrates the key stylised facts needed to frame it – facts that 
summarise the key past and present trends in international trade.
28 
In the last decade, the debate over international trade has focused mainly on explaining the slowdown in cross -border trade activity observed in the years following the GFC. This manifested 
itself in the stagnation of world trade as a share of global GDP (Antrás, 2021) and in the reduction 
in the ratio of  world imports to GDP growth (commonly referred to as “income elasticity of trade”) 
observed since 2012 (see IRC Trade Task Force, 2016, also Martínez -Martín, 2016). Faced with 
these developments, some authors claimed the world had entered a phase of de- globalisation (Van 
Bergeijk, 2019), as the global economy seems to be oscillating restlessly between periods of 
globalisation and periods of de- globalisation. According to other studies, however, the process of 
globalisation is simply experiencing a slowdown – hence the term “slowbalisation”
29 – which, far 
from being a purely temporary phase, could prove to be a lasting, structural phenomenon. In this respect, Antrás (2021) argues that the massive expansion of globalisation (known as the “hyperglobalisation”  phase) observed since 2008 was due to the development of information and 
communication technology, a significant fall in effective trade costs on the back of tariff elimination and technological factors, and political forces that promoted the adoption of market economy practices in several Asian countries – forces that have lost steam in recent years, making a 
slowdown in trade globalisation inevitable.  
The stylised facts that can be observed in the data show that establishing the trajectory of trade globalisation since the GFC is a complex exercise, the results of which ultimately depend on the aggregate under consideration. By way of example, the marked slowdown in firms’ decisions 
concerning the relocation abroad of part of their production processes (commonly referred to as 
 
28   The box is base d on the analysi s in Kataryniuk et al.  (2021).  
29   See, among others, The Economist  (2019) and Irwin  (2020).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 22  
 “offshoring”) that was observed in the last decade, as well as the numerous cases of repatriations of 
previously offshored activities in the years that preceded the COVID -19 pandemic (a phenomenon 
known as “reshoring”), suggest that a de- globalisation phase may be underway.30 On the other 
hand, the levelling off of trade in goods hints more at a “slowbalisation” phenomenon. The continued growth of international trade in services, for its part, seems to signal a continuation of 
pre-GFC globalisation trajectories. All in all, the data hint at the increased complexity of international 
trade relations, further supported by higher fragmentation caused by US -China trade tensions and 
the Brexit process, coupled with a rebound of regionalisation in key areas.  
Chart A  
The evolution of trade- related policy measures  
a) World tariff and non -tariff barriers  b) Trade agreements  
(Average of effectively applied tariffs percentages; number of measures in 
force)  (Notifications; cumulative notifications)  
 
  
  
Sources: World Bank, UNCTAD and WTO  
Notes: Effectively applied tariffs are defined as the lower of preferential tariffs and “most -favoured- nation” tariffs.  
In particular, a first stylised observation is that post -GFC trade policy measures provide a mixed 
picture of the trajectory of trade globalisation. In the years that followed the GFC, the decrease in 
tariff barriers (measured as the simple average of effectively applied tariffs) slowed, which was 
further complicated by the US -China trade war (see Chart A, panel a).31 At the same time, non- tariff 
barriers increased markedly.32 Restrictions on international trade in services, for their part, did not 
lessen significantly in the medium term (Kataryniuk et al., 2021), although 2021 data signal that there was some loosening of regulatory barriers in certain sectors.
33 The number of trade 
 
30    The pandemic itself, on the other hand, does not seem to have spurred a massive wave of reshoring, 
although survey evidence suggests that in some sectors the repatriation of previously offshored 
production processes may constitute a tangible risk in the years to come. See Section 3.2.1 for a thorough discussion of the impact of the COVID -19 crisis on firms’  reshoring decisions.  
31     Effectively applied tariffs are defined as the lower of preferential tariffs and “most -favoured -nation” 
tariffs. The series does not include the tariffs imposed as a consequence of the trade tensions between the United States an d other countries, which have emerged since 2018.  
32     Some of these measures, such as sanitary and phytosanitary measures, are typically used as 
standard -setting provisions and may end up having a neutral or even positive impact on trade flows, 
although this impact is found to be widely heterogeneous across products and partner countries. 
Other types of non- tariff measures such as quantity and price controls, export restrictions and 
contingent trade -protective measures, have traditionally been used as ins truments of commercial 
policy and have been found to have an adverse impact on trade flows. See, among others, Beghin and Li  (2012) and Conesa and Timini  (2019).  
33    See OECD  (2022).  010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,00070,00080,000
024681012
2000 2004 2008 2012 2016 2020Tariff barriers
Non-tariff barriers (right -hand scale )
0100200300400500600
0102030405060
1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018Goods notifications
Goods -Brexit related
Services notifications
Services -Brexit related
Accessions
Accessions -Brexit related
Cumulative notifications (right hand scale )
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 23  
 agreements in force increased steadily after the GFC. Still, in recent years there has been a 
slowdown in the number of new trade agreements notified. This deceleration could in part be 
related to the increased complexity of trade treaties, which recently have typically started to incorporate sophisticated clauses covering investment, labour and environmental issues (“deep 
agreements”), necessarily resulting in longer times needed for the agreements themselves to be 
concluded and approved. It should be noted that the peak in new agreements observed in 2021 was mostly due to Brexit, which led to a proliferation of bilateral treaties between the United 
Kingdom and third countries, hinting at the increasing fragmentation and complexity of international 
trade relations (see Chart A, panel b).  
A second observation concerns the diverging growth of trade in goods and services. The levelling off of trade flows recorded after the GFC is associated with lower trade openness,  as measured by 
the sum of imports and exports relative to GDP. This pattern is mostly related to openness in goods trade, which tended to decline due to several factors such as the rebalancing of the Chinese economy, the slowdown in global investment and the absence of any marked liberalisation 
initiatives (see Chart B, panel a). By contrast, services trade as a share of GDP continued to 
increase after the GFC, boosted by technological advances – a trend that has been led, crucially, by 
EU countries.
34 As the chart shows, these medium -term dynamics have been temporarily 
overturned in the context of the pandemic. While the contraction in goods trade was relatively contained during the COVID -19 crisis and the recovery relatively fast, service trade was much m ore 
deeply affected by pandemic -related restrictions and struggled to recover to its pre- crisis levels.  
Chart B  
Trajectory of world trade and GVC -related trade  
a) World trade openness  b) GVC -related trade  
(sum of imports and exports related to GDP)  (share  of total trade, percentages)  
  
Sources: World Bank and own elaboration based on the Long -run World Input -Output Database (WIOD), OECD (Trade in Value Added) and Trade Data 
Monitor.  
Notes: GVC -related trade is measured as the value of goods crossing more than one border as a share of total goods trade, as defined in Borin et al. (2021).  
A third observation relates to the recent rise in regionalisation. In the EU28 (i.e. the EU in its pre-Brexit composition) and among NAFTA countries, the internal share of trade in goods and services was on a declining trend in the early 2000’s but started to increase in the post -GFC period (see 
Chart C, panel a). This is consistent with the finding that the EU has been increasingly sourcing value- added from within the region in recent years (Bontadini et al., 2022). In other highly -integrated 
 
34    See  Kataryniuk et al.  (2021) . 0. 000. 020. 040. 060. 080. 100. 120. 140. 16
0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 7
1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008 2012 2016 2020Total trade
Goods trade
Services trade (right hand scale)
20253035404550
1965 1971 1977 1983 1989 1995 2001 2007 2013 2019
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 24  
 areas, like the countries of the Asia- Pacific region that recently agreed the Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP) trade treaty,35 the regionalisation of goods trade was on an 
increasing trend even before the GFC. Focusing on European economies, the level of 
regionalisation, as measured by the internal share of trade, is higher among EU28 countries than 
within the euro area (see Chart C, panel b). As shown by Kataryniuk et al. (2021), the post -GFC 
increase in regional integration among EU countries seems to be related to a strengthening of trade 
linkages between euro area economies and other EU countries outside the euro area, while EU27 
integration with the United Kingdom, by contrast, has been diminishing both on the goods and the 
services side, a trend that has accelerated since the Brexit referendum of 2016.  
Chart C  
Regionalisation of trade linkages  
a) Evolution of internal trade  b) Regionalisation in the e uro area and the EU  
(percentage of total trade)  (internal trade/total trade)  
  
Sources: Eurostat, ASEANStatsDataPortal, IMF and WTO.  
Notes: In panel a, NAFTA and the EU28 include the trade of goods and services – other blocs only goods trade. ASEAN: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, 
Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam; NAFTA: US, Canada, Mexico; MERCOSUR: Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay; RCEP: 
ASEAN + Australia, China, Japan, Korea, New Zealand; Euro area refers to the 19 economies currently integrated in the bloc.  
Another stylised fact concerns the slowdown in GVC fragmentation. After the GFC the 
fragmentation of GVCs levelled off as GVC -related trade, after having bounced back in the 
aftermath of the crisis, remained practically unchanged (see Chart B, panel b). Nonetheless, some 
significant differences emerged between the integration in global production processes of advanced 
and emerging economies. As Chart D shows, advanced economies’ GVC participation in 2018 was 
almost unchanged on its 2005 level, including in the most important European economies such as Germany, Spain, France and Italy. By contrast, some developing countries have undergone 
significant modifications in their GVC participation since the mid- 2000s. Indeed, China experienced 
a large reduction in the share of foreign value- added embodied in its gross exports (an index of 
“backward” value chain participation), balanced by a rise in the domestic value- added embedded in 
foreign exports (proxying “forward” value chain participation), signalling a shift in the country’s 
position in the global production chain. Backward integration also dimini shed in other Asian 
countries such as Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines.  
 
 
35    The countries were Australia, Brunei, China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Laos, Malaysia, My anmar, New 
Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.  
0. 40. 450. 50. 550. 60. 650. 7
2000 2004 2008 2012 2016EU28 goods
EU28 services
EU28 total
Euro area goods
Euro area services
Euro area total
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 25  
 Chart D  
GVC participation  
a) Selected advanced economies  b) Selected emerging economies  
(backward  participation: foreign value -added in gross domestic exports/gross 
domestic exports;  
forward participation: domestic value -added in gross foreign exports/gross 
domestic exports)  (backward  participation: foreign value -added in gross domestic exports/gross 
domestic exports;  
forward participation: domestic value -added in gross foreign exports/gross 
domestic exports)  
  
Source: UNCTAD.  
Chart E  
Offshoring and relocation out of EU countries  
a) Offshoring of EU firms  b) Relocation of non -EU firms out of EU countries  
(number of cases)  (number of cases)  
  
Sources: Banco de España based on the European Restructuring Monitor.  
Notes: In panel a, offshoring denotes the relocation of part of the production process to a new country, excluding the country of origin of the firm. In panel b, 
data reflect the relocation of part of the production process to a new country, excluding the country of origin of the firm. Data include only relocation decisions originating in an EU country. EU refers to the EU27, i.e. the EU in its current composition. Intra (extra) -EU denotes a relocation decision whose destination is 
exclusively an intra (ext ra)-EU country. “Europe” and “Eastern Europe” destinations, in the terminology used in the European Restructuring Monitor, are 
considered to be intra- EU. Relocation decisions whose destination is not specified are not included.  
A final observation relates to the reduction in firms’ offshoring decisions, namely the decision to 
relocate part of the production process to a foreign country. The slowdown in GVC fragmentation 
entailed a reduction in the offshoring of production, as evidenced by the decrease in the number of 
European firms that resorted to offshoring to both EU and non- EU destinations (see Chart E, panel 
a). In contrast to the offshoring decisions taken by EU firms, relocation of part of the production 
process out of EU countries on behalf of non-E U companies has only tended to decrease since 
2014 (see Chart E, panel b). At the same time, reshoring, namely the decision to relocate back 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 7
SVK
BEL
NDL
IRL
DEU
ESP
FRA
ITA
KO R
CAN
GBR
CHE
NOR
JPN
NZL
AUS
USABackward 2005
Backward 2018Forward 2005
Forward 2018
00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 6
PHL MYS VNM MEX THA ZAF INDBRA CHN SAU IDNPER COL RUSBackward 2005
Backward 2018Forward 2005
Forward 2018
0102030405060
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021Origin: own country, dest: 
intra-EU
Origin: own country, dest: 
extra -EU
Origin: own country, dest: 
bothOrigin: other EU country, dest: 
intra-EU
Origin: other EU country, dest: 
extra -EU
Origin: other EU country, dest: 
both
05101520253035
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021Dest: intra -EU
Dest: extra -EU (excl. reshoring)
Dest: both
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 26  
 home a production process that had previously been moved to a foreign country, became a 
significant phenomenon. Among European firms, between 2016 and 2018 nearly 100 cases of 
reshoring from extra- EU countries were reported, along with 90 from other EU economies.36 
Box 1.3  
Are there any signs of the “friend- shoring” of GVCs?  
The trade war between the United States and China, Brexit, the COVID -19 pandemic and the 
Russian war against Ukraine have highlighted the fragility of GVCs.  In many countries these events 
have triggered a political push towards the “friend- shoring” of GVCs. “Friend- shoring” here refers to 
a trade strategy whereby a country seeks to reduce geopolitical risk in trade exposures by orienting its trade relationships towards countries with which it has close political alignment (see Section 1 and Box 1.2).
37  
On the basis of monthly real US imports of GVC -related goods at the (Harmonised System) HS -6 
digit level,38 Niemann (2022) shows that US GVC -related import data39 do not reveal clear 
evidence that “friend- shoring” has actually taken place in recent years.  In his empirical exercises 
based on countries’  votes at the United Nations General Assembly, Niemann distinguishes between 
a block of countries that display a higher level of foreign- policy similarity to the United States than 
they do to China (e.g. Canada, the EU countries, Australia, Japan and South Korea) and a second block that is closely aligned with China.
40  
According to Niemann’s paper, overall, after the start of the US -China trade war, US GVC -related 
imports from US -aligned countries did not grow faster than those from countries in the China block 
(see Chart A, panel a). They fared somewhat better in 2019, and in the first months of 2020 they did not fall by as much as GVC -related imports from the China block. However, the latter episode was 
related to the closure of the Chinese economy because of the spread of COVID -19. When China’s 
economy reopened and other countries were in lockdown, GVC -related imports from the China 
block quickly caught up with those from US -aligned countries.  
When pandemic -specific effects are controlled for, there is still no clear evidence in support of the 
“friend- shoring” of US GVC -related imports.  Niemann (2022) shows this by using a difference- in-
difference approach on a panel of imports of GVC -goods. In his regression framework, the time-
varying effect of political alignment with the United States on GVC -related imports is captured by a 
dummy for countries in the US block, which is interacted with time dummies. At the same time, the regression controls for pandemic -related workplace closures in source countries.
41  
 
36    According to data from the European Reshoring Monitor.  
37    The term has been promoted by Yellen  (2022).  
38    The data source for nominal imports is the Trade Data Monitor. The sub-indices for US import prices 
provided by the Bureau of Labour Statistics match the HS -good classification at a fine-grained level, 
allowing for the construction of real US imports.  
39    GVC- related goods refer here to processed and specific goods for intermediate consumption 
according to the United Nations’ 2018 Broad Economic Categories Commission. These goods 
account for roughly 20% of overall US goods imports.  
40    Niemann  (2022) reports UN General Assembly votes in the year 2015 as listed in the Foreign Policy 
Similarity Database (Häge,  2017). The calculation procedure for foreign policy similari ty indices is 
described in Bekkers and Góes  (2022).  
41    More specifically, the panel regression specification reads as:  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 27  
 According to the estimation there were no significant trends for “friend- shoring” prior to the trade 
war between the United States and China. The coefficients for the effect of policy alignment with the 
United States are largely not significant at the 5% level (see Chart A, panel b). After 2019,  the 
number of significantly positive “friend- shoring” coefficients increases, although it still does not show 
any clear trend. The evidence in support of “friend- shoring” is even weaker if NAFTA membership or 
the use of English as an official or spoken language are used instead as a criterion for 
demonstrating closeness with the United States. The findings also hold if pandemic -related goods 
are excluded from GVC -goods or if the classification of the IMF (2022) is used. When the analysis 
zooms in on exposed goods with a high Chinese market share, a high concentration on a few source countries or a low trade elasticity (Fontagné et al., 2022), the estimated size of the “friend-
shoring” coefficient increases on average, albeit with higher statistical uncertai nty and again without 
showing any clear trend.  
The absence of any clear evidence for the “friend- shoring” of US GVCs, despite the recent large 
global shocks, suggests that a reorganisation of GVCs would be costly or time- consuming. The 
weaker growth in the average number of source countries of GVC -goods compared with those of 
final goods, as found by Niemann (2022), corroborates the notion that GVC -related trade 
relationships are more difficult to build.
42 This is also reflected by various firm surveys (e.g . Allianz 
Research, 2020; Di Stefano et al., 2021; McKinsey, 2021). However, if geopolitical tensions proved 
to be persistent, the momentum for “friend- shoring” might gain traction.  
 
 
    yijt=α+ γb⋅1(USBloc ki)+γt⋅1(Mon tht)+βt�1(Mon tht)⋅1(USBloc ki)�+ γj+δ⋅Covi di,t+εi,j,t. 
where yijt is a logarithmic time series of US imports of the GVC -related good j from country i at time t. 
1(USBlocki) is a dummy that controls for systematic differences between import volumes of both 
country blocks. 1(Montht) is a vector of time dummies for each month over the sample from January 
2017 to June 2022 that controls for common developments relative to th e base period January 2018. 
The coefficients βt measure the time- varying effect of political alignment with the United States on 
GVC -related US imports. γj are good -fixed effects and Covi di,t controls for current value and three 
lags of the Oxford COVID -19 Government Response Tracker’s index for workplace closures in trade 
partner countries (Angrist et al., 2021). Import data and import price deflators are sourced from the 
Trade Data Monitor and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.  
42  Section 3.2. discusses furt her reasons for a slow re -organisation of GVCs as well as signs of an 
increasing effort by firms to improve supply chain resilience.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 28  
 Chart A  
Effect of “friend- shoring” on GVC -related imports to the United S tates  
a) US GVC -related import volumes from countries with 
foreign policies aligned with the United States and 
from countries aligned with China  b) Regression coefficients for friend -shoring effect  
(2017=100, monthly data)  (time -varying coefficient measur ing the differential effect of political alignment 
with the United States on GVC -related US imports)  
  
Sources: Trade Data Monitor, Bureau of Labour Statistics, Häge (2017), Hale et al. (2021) and own calculations.  
Notes: In panel a, real imports of GVC -related goods to the United States are from countries with a closer foreign -policy alignment with the United States and 
from countries with a closer foreign- policy alignment with China, based on their votes in the United Nations General Assembly in 2015. GVC -related goods are 
processed and specific goods are processed for intermediate consumption according to the Broad Economic Categories (UN, 2018)  and are observed at the 
HS-6 good level. In panel b, the chart shows coefficients of a regression of pre -trade war -adjusted imports of a panel of GVC -related HS -6 goods i from US 
trade partners j  on a dummy for countries which are more closely aligned with the United States, which is interacted with a time -dummy. Dotted lines 
represent the 90% confidence interval. The sample starts in January 2017 and ends in June 2022. The regression controls for workplace closures (Oxford 
COVID -19 Government Response Tracker, Hale et al., 2021) and includes fixed effects for months and HS -6 good categories.  
 
Box 1.4  
The impact of geopolitical fragmentation on global trade  
The increasing role of geopolitical tensions poses a significant risk for global trade and has the 
potential to generate trade policy restrictions (see Section 1) . What is  the possible economic impact 
of increases in trade restrictions along geopolitical borders? In a recent paper, Campos et al. (2022) 
use a general equilibrium trade model to examine how the fragmentation of the world into trade 
blocs along political borders would affect global trade flows. Bloc boundaries are defined according 
to how countries voted on the 9 April 2021 United Nations General Assembly resolution concerning the suspension of the membership rights of the Russian Federation in the Human Rights Council. 
Countries are part of a western, eastern or neutral bloc, depending on whether they voted with Russia, against Russia or abstained. Trade policy relations between geopolitical blocs are assumed to have returned to levels similar to those during the Cold War era. The increase in trade costs is 
modelled by estimating the impact of a measure of aggregate trade restrictions covering both tariff 
and non- tariff measures (“MATR”, Estefanía- Flores et al., 2022) on bilateral trade flows using a 
theory -consi stent structural gravity model and assuming that trade costs rise as if MATR had 
returned to its highest country -specific historical levels for trade between the western and eastern 
blocs.  
The trade and welfare effects of trade fragmentation are sizeable.  It is estimated that exports from 
the eastern bloc to the western bloc fall by almost 20% and exports from the western bloc to the 
eastern bloc by roughly 27%. The neutral bloc benefits by attracting some of the trade volume 60708090100110120130140
01/2017 01/2018 01/2019 01/2020 01/2021 01/2022China block
US block
-0.4-0.3-0.2-0.10. 00. 10. 20. 30. 4
01/2017 01/2018 01/2019 01/2020 01/2021 01/2022
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 29  
 reduction between the opposing blocs due to trade diversion. It is predicted that it would increase its 
exports to the eastern bloc by 3% and its imports from the western bloc by 1%. A typical country in 
the eastern bloc suffers a larger GDP drop than a typical western country.  
The aggr egate numbers mask heterogeneity at the country level. In general, countries that are 
more open are more affected by any fragmentation between blocs, as are countries with strong 
trade relationships with countries belonging to the opposing bloc, as illustr ated in Chart A. Losses 
experienced by countries in the EU are mitigated, however, by the fact that most of their trade is 
with EU partners (53% of EU world merchandise trade) or with other western bloc economies (trade 
with the United States, the United K ingdom and EFTA countries alone corresponds to 15% of EU 
world merchandise trade). Trade flows with the western bloc are predicted to increase for all 
countries in the EU.  
Some countries could gain from trade fragmentation. It is predicted that a small num ber of countries 
in South- East Asia and in Africa would be better off in a fragmented world, as they would increase 
their trade with countries in the two opposing blocs. This is because the increase in trade costs 
between the eastern and western blocs makes goods produced in the neutral bloc relatively cheap. 
This happens primarily when countries step into the void left by western countries which have 
reduced their trade relations with China. The trade gains are small, however, in relation to the losses exp erienced by countries affected by trade fragmentation and might be erased in scenarios 
of deeper trade fragmentation in which the trade flows of neutral countries are also affected.  
The estimates discussed in this box can be interpreted as a conservative bound. The model used in 
the simulations only considers the trade channel and does not take into account any effects 
stemming from the existence of multiple sectors in the economy and their interconnections, GVCs, 
financial linkages or any dynamic effects,  such as – for example – the impact of fragmentation on 
investment or productivity. Results are therefore likely to err on the side of caution. Moreover, the 
trade model computes the difference between two equilibria, with no transition costs, and impacts 
are interpretable as long term effects. Finally, the exact definition of geopolitical borders and the 
size of the increase in trade costs are uncertain.   
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 30  
 Chart A  
Change in EU27 trade flows in a trade fragmentation scenario 
Trade with the western bloc (left -hand map) and trade with the eastern bloc (right -hand map)  
 (percentage points)  
  
Source: Based on results reported in Campos et al. (2022).  
Notes: The chart shows the predicted change of trade flows (calculated as the weighted average growth rate of imports and exports) over the long term. The 
map on the right shows the decrease in trade flows between individual EU27 countries and the group of countries of the eastern bloc. The map on the left shows the increase of trade flows between individual EU27 countries and the group of countries in the western bloc. The appendix in Campos et al. (2022) contains detailed figures for all countries.  
 
Box 1.5  
OSA: concept and EU legislative actions  
The concept of “strategic autonomy” was explicitly mentioned in the European Council (EUCO) 
conclusions of December 2013, in the context of the first thematic debate on defence held after the 
entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty (2009).43 Leaders affirmed the need for a more integrated 
defence, technological and industrial base in order to develop and sustain European defence capabilities. This would enhance the strategic autonomy of the EU and its ability to act with partners.
44   
Strategic autonomy became a key part of the European Union Global Strategy  (EUGS) adopted at 
the EUCO meeting on 28 June 2016, featuring a wider, integrated and open perspective, which included elements of hard power
45 and soft power46. The EUGS identified five priorities for external 
action by the EU: strengthening security and defence, investing in the resilience of the states and societies in the east and south of the EU, developing an integrated approach to conflicts and crises, 
 
43     Although the term “open strategic autonomy” has become increasingly familiar in recent years, it has 
actually been a feature of European economic integration from the start. In fact, several of the first 
European treaties and common policies of the post -war period, such as the European Coal and Steel 
Community, Euratom and the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), contained distinct elements of strategic autonomy.  
44     See Council of the European Union (2013) . 
45     Such as the improvement of defence capabilities, which led to the setting up of the European 
Defence Fund, see European Commission (2018a ). 
46     Such as job opportunities, inclusive societies, human rights or the resilience of states and societies, 
among others.  

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 31  
 promoting and supporting cooperative regional orders, and reinforcing global governance based on 
international law.47 
The conclusions of the Council of Ministers in N ovember 2016 provided the EU’s first concrete – 
and perhaps only – official definition of strategic autonomy so far, stated as its “capacity to act 
autonomously when and where necessary and with partners wherever possible”.48 Although 
implicitly present in earlier economic documents but up to then essentially referring to a common 
European defence culture and values49, the term “open strategic autonomy” appeared explicitly in 
the European Commission Communication on the proposal for the Next Generation EU ( NGEU) 
programme in May 2020.50 The EU Council of Ministers of 16 November 2020 reaffirmed the 
importance of achieving strategic autonomy while preserving an open economy in the most 
sensitive industrial ecosystems and in other specific areas.51 On 19 January 2021, the Commission 
published a Communication with the aim of asserting an increasingly leading role in global financial 
and economic governance. The Commission is committed to strengthening the EU internally by further reinforcing the Single Market and completing the banking union and the capital markets 
union, and by proposing steps aimed at strengthening the international role of the euro, enhancing 
efficiency and ensuring the resilience of EU financial market infrastructures and payment solutions , 
as well as improving the EU sanctions framework and the EU’s resilience when faced by unjustified 
unilateral extraterritorial sanctions imposed by third parties.  
The EC revised its state aid framework in response to the COVID -19 crisis
52 and, more recently, to 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine,53 in order to support the EU’s economy while ensuring a level 
playing field. The European Parliament and the Council adopted a regulation establishing a 
framework for the screening of FDI into the EU on the grounds of security and public order.54 The 
Commission revised its trade policy in 2021 to support the EU’s open strategic autonomy.55 The EU 
also revised its industrial strategy in two Commission communications in 2020 and 2021 
respectively,56 to further support the twin green and digital transitions. With regard to the latter, on 
the topic of digital sovereignty, the Commission also pr oposed a Chips Act57 and a comprehensive 
set of measures to ensure the EU’s security of supply, resilience and technological leadership in semiconductor technologies and applications. Finally, in the digital domain, the EC presented a 
proposal for a regulation covering the Single Market for digital services
58 as well as a proposal for a 
 
47     See European External Action Service  (2016), and Council of the European Union  (2016b).  
48     Strategic autonomy became a key concept for the European Commission in 2019 when Commission 
President von der Le yen stated her intention to set up a “geopolitical commission” (see Blockmans , 
2020). For further development of the term see Lippert et al . (2019), Van den Abeele  (2021) and 
Anghel et al . (2020).  
49     See Macron  (2017) and Michel  (2020).  
50     See European Commission  (2020a).  
51     Such as health, defence industry, space, digital, energy and critical raw materials. See Council of the 
European Union  (2020).  
52     Successive amendments to the state aid framework can be found on the European  Commission’s 
web page on competition policy . The latest consolidated version can be found in European 
Commission  (2021a).  
53     See European Commission  (2022b). 
54      See European Parliament and Council  (2019). The current, consolidated version can be found here. 
55     See European Commission (2021b) . 
56     See European Commission  (2020b)  and European Commission  (2021c). The EU’s revised and 
updated  industrial policy aims to provide further impetus to the twin energy and digital transitions, 
supporting the relevant  GVCs  and the industrial ecosystems, and  to diversify supply chains. 
57     See European Commission  (2022c).  
58     Also known as the Digital Services Act  (see European Commission , 2020c). 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 32  
 regulation on contestable and fair markets in the digital sector,59 with the aim of creating a safer 
digital space protecting the fundamental rights of all users of these services and of establishing fair 
and equal conditions to promote innovation, growth and competitiveness in the Single Market and the global arena. These proposals were adopted in 2022 and enter into force in 2023.
60 
The term “open” in OSA is intended to indicate that OSA should not be understood as an attempt by 
the EU to turn towards protectionism in pursuit of strategic autonomy. At the same time, autonomy 
may necessitate less reliance on and/or exposure to the global economy. This balancing of openness and autonomy, especially over longer periods of time and in an environment of 
geopolitical uncertainty, may lead to differences in policy choices. Against this background, the term 
“OSA” remains an “essentially contested concept” ( Council of the European Union, 2021), mainly 
due to the different national and historical appreciations of sovereignty in a European context.
61 At 
the same time, recent events have triggered some convergence in key aspects of the sets of policies requiring agreement among EU Member States. The policy perspective tensions entailed 
within the term “OSA” seem to point towards an intention to enhance resilience while maintaining an 
open, multilateral perspective which may require both building up self -reliance and increasing 
diversification. This needed balance derives from the fact that the EU has been characterised, since 
its inception, by openness, especially with regard to trade and finance, and draws much of its 
strength, prosperity and success from this openness. In addition, the EU also aspires to project its 
global influence as a standard- setter in areas such as climate change or human, social and labour 
rights, often using instruments such as trade and investment agreements as a vehicle for ensuring 
the commitment of partners. However, the flipside of the EU’s openness is its potential exposure to 
external (geopolitical) shocks which arise from sources including the non- compliance of some 
countries with the international, rules -based world order (see Anghel et al., 2020) . 
 
59    Also known as Digital Markets Act  (see European Commission , 2020 d). 
60   Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 (Digital Servic es Act)  and Regulation (EU) 2022/1925 (Digital Markets Act)  
61    See Van den Abeele  (2021).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 33  
 Chart A  
Geopolitical events and the evolution of the EU’s OSA concept to date62 
 
 
62     The COVID-19 pandemic is included as a “geopolitical development” insofar as it had a geopolitical 
dimension that made it necessary in some cases, according to stated intentions, to act in the 
interests of national security (e.g. closing borders or ensuring adequate numbers of vaccines).  December 2013
European 
Council"… enhance its strategic autonomy and its 
ability to act with partners "
June 2016
European Union 
Global Strategy"An appropriate level of ambition and 
strategic autonomy "
March 2020
Commission 
Communication "... that will support the twin transitions, 
make EU industry more competitive 
globally and enhance Europe’s strategic 
autonomy. "2016-
2020
Brexit2019
COVID 
outbreak
October 2020
European 
Council 
conclusions"Achieving strategic autonomy while 
preserving an open economy is a key 
objective of the Union "
global 
shortage
s of 
supply
imbalance
s in 
global 
energy 
markets
April 2022
 Council 
conclusions " ... recent developments, in particular (...) 
, have further confirmed the importance of 
pursuing the EU’s strategic autonomy while 
preserving an open economy, ... "2022
Russian 
invasion 
of 
Ukraine2021
BIDEN
Admini
s-
trationGeopolitical Developments
2018- 
China–
United 
States
 trade 
war2017-
2021
TRUM
P
adminis-
tration
I
M
P
A
C
T
 
o
f t
he
 
C
O
V
I
D
 
P
AND
E
M
I
C2014
Civil 
Protes
t- 
Taiwan2013
First 
tension
s with 
N.Kore
a2013
Nuclear 
deal with 
Iran
In the context of promotion 
peace and security of EU 
Achieving the EU’s 
economic and financial 
strategic autonomy in an 
open economy: one year 
after the Commission’s 
CommunicationMay 2021
Commission 
Communication  “Updating  2020 New 
Industrial Strategy: 
Building a stronger Single 
Market for Europe’s recovery”" ... strengthen Europe’s OSA and (…)  are 
even more acute than a year ago."
Dec 2021
Joint Declaration 
(EP, Council, 
EC) “EU Legislative Priorities 
for 2022”" ... To better defend its interests and 
values   (...)  strengthen Europe’s capacity 
to act autonomously and its global 
influence"A New Industrial Strategy 
for Europe
January 2021
Commission 
Communication  “The European economic 
and financial system: 
fostering openness, strength 
and resilience”"… reinforcing strategic autonomy in the 
financial system and in payment systems 
by adopting twin measures"
February 2021
Commission 
Communication   “Trade Policy Review - 
An Open, Sustainable and 
Assertive Trade Policy”"… EU’s ability to make its own choices and 
shape the world around it through 
leadership and engagement, reflecting its 
strategic interests and values"In the context of Single 
Market, Industrial Policy  
and
 Digital transition2014
Russian 
annexatio
n of 
CrimeaEvolution of the OSA concept
STRATEGIC AUTONOMY  linked to  COMMON FOREIGN and SECURITY 
POLICY
In the context of Strengthening 
Europe's defence industry
OPEN STRATEGIC AUTONOMY   extended to  ECONOMIC ( and others ) 
POLICIES
global shortages 
of  supply
imbalances in 
global energy  
markets
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 34  
 2 EU external dependencies  
This section discusses the EU’s trade interdependencies, at both an aggregate 
and a granular level, with a particular focus on energy and CRMs.  One problem 
with detailed and granular statistics is the delay in their publication, meaning that in 
some cases the data used in the analysis pertain to 2020, 2019 or even 2018. 
Nonetheless, a partial update of key figures is provided where possible, given that 
the war in Ukraine has led to drastic changes in some EU dependencies, notably with regard to Russian energy supplies.  
In addition, this section discusses the potential vulnerabilities and dependencies arising from cross- border investment and finance linkages, as 
well as those arising from the current architecture of payments and financial 
market infrastructures. It also addresses the OSA -relevant vulnerabilities faced by 
issuers of non- dominant currencies.  
The section also looks at the international labour market and population flows, 
and the implications of a potentially less favourable legislative framework for 
the movement of people across frontiers for geopolitical reasons. The context 
of this discussion is the fact that the EU has benefited from the regular flow of low 
and high- skilled workers from third countries, who have contributed to enriching 
European labour markets and compensated for adverse demographic trends.     
2.1 Trade dependencies  
From an aggregate perspective, the EU is more dependent than other major 
economies on imported energy.  At the macro- sectoral level, when dependencies 
are computed, domestic production and global interlinkages are taken into account 
through the use of inter -country input output tables.63 To this end, a measure of 
foreign dependency may be calculated as the share of directly and indirectly 
imported value- added over directly and indirectly imported value- added plus 
domestic value- added. The index ranges from 0- 100% and will be close to 100% 
when a country or a region relies only on foreign goods (see Box 2.1 conveys a full description of the methodology used to analyse trade dependencies). Chart 4 reports 
this sectoral index, computed for the EU, China and the United States. In the energy 
sector, these three regions exhibit a high level of dependency on foreign production, 
the EU being the most dependent with a foreign- to-total value- added ratio above 
50%. Even taking into account the recent reduction in imports coming from Russia, 
this figure is not likely to be s ignificantly lower at the current juncture, given that 
energy substitution is coming from other foreign sources (most notably the United 
States and Norway). In the agricultural sector, China relies less on foreign products, 
while the EU and the United Stat es show a similar degree of foreign dependency 
(20%). In the manufacturing sector, the degree of dependency is similar for China 
 
63    See Borin and Mancini  (2019).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 35  
 and the EU (around 15%), while it is slightly higher for the United States (20%). 
Finally, the services sector is intrinsically  less dependent on foreign sourcing, as it is 
less tradable than goods and presents ratios that are not above 10%.  
Chart 4  
Aggregate import dependency at macro- sectoral level (2018)  
(percentages)  
 
Sources: Own elaboration with OECD (Trade in Value Added) data for 2018 and the Inter -Country Input -Output (icio) Stata tool (see 
Belotti et al. , 2021).  
Notes: Blue bars: foreign value -added by sector of origin directly or indirectly imported by the EU/(foreign value- added by sector of 
origin directly or indirectly imported by the EU + EU value- added by sector of origin); orange bars: foreign value- added by sector of 
origin directly or indirectly imported by the United States/(foreign v alue- added by sector of origin directly or indirectly imported by the 
United States + US value- added by sector of origin); yellow bars: foreign value- added by sector of origin directly or indirectly imported 
by China/(foreign value- added by sector of origin directly or indirectly imported by China + China value- added by sector of origin).  
 
Chart 5  
EU direct and indirect bilateral import dependency at sectoral level (2018)  
a) EU dependency on China  b) EU dependency on the United States  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Sources: Own elaboration with OECD (Trade in Value Added) data for 2018 and the Inter -Country Input -Output (icio) Stata tool (see 
Belotti et al ., 2021).  
Notes: Panel a: Chinese value -added by sector of origin imported directly or indirectly by the EU/(foreign value- added by sector of 
origin imported directly or indirectly by the EU + EU value- added by sector of origin); panel b: US value- added by  sector of origin 
imported directly or indirectly by the EU/(foreign value- added by sector of origin imported directly or indirectly by the EU + EU value-
added by sector of origin).  
EU import dependency on Chinese and US production is very heterogeneous 
at the sectoral level. The reliance on Chinese imported value- added is highest for 0102030405060
Agr icul ture Energy Manufacturing ServicesEU
China
United States
0 10 20Fabricated metal productsRubber and plastics product sCoke, refined productsAgricult ure, hunting, f orestryMining, non-energyOther non-met allic productsFishing and aquacultureChemical productsElectrical equipmentBasic m etal sComputer and electronicsText ile products
0 5 10 15 20Mi ning suppor tChemical productsAdministrative servicesFishing and aquacultureProf essional activit iesPharmaceutical productsFinancial activitiesPostal and courier activitiesComputer and electronicsAir transportPublishing activitiesOther transport equipment
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 36  
 EU production in textiles, computers and electronics and the basic metal sectors 
(see Chart 5). Dependency on US value- added is more concentrated in the transport 
equipment sector, the services sectors (including publishing, audio- visual and 
broadcasting activities), and the air transport and computer and electronics sectors. The semiconductor GVC in particular and the EU’s position in that chain is discussed 
in more detail in Box 2.2.  
International trade in agricultural commodities also creates dependencies. Internal EU prices and supplies of food products are heavily affected by geopolitical 
events and fluctuations in international markets, although the operation of the CAP 
provides a partial cushion. At the global level, a number of risks are mounting after 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Fuel prices and fertiliser shortages, two key inputs 
for food production, are combining with deteriorating climate conditions. As a result , 
social unrest associated with food prices and food shortages is mounting in some 
developing and emerging countries.
64  
In the EU, the application of the CAP cushions the disturbances in 
international commodity prices. The CAP supports agricultural production through 
a broad set of interventions that impact the prices and the production of agricultural 
commodities in the EU. This system is based on three main tools, namely direct 
subsidies to farmers, price support mec hanisms and guaranteed minimum prices, 
complemented by tariffs and quotas on imports of agricultural products to the EU. As 
a result, international and EU year -on-year price changes for the same raw material 
tend to be lower in Europe than on international  markets (see Chart 6, panel a). The 
CAP also seems to have a moderating effect on those commodity prices for which EU is more self -sufficient, as is the case for dairy products (see Chart 6, panel b).  
These issues are discussed in greater depth in Box 2.3. 
  
 
64     See the article entitled “ Costly food and energy are fostering glob al unrest ”, The Economist , 19 July 
2022.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 37  
 Chart 6  
EU and international food commodity prices  
a) EU and international food commodity 
prices  b) EU and dairy product prices during 
episodes of price rises  
(y-axis: EU prices year -on-year percentages; x -axis: international 
prices in euros, year -on-year percentages)  (Index = 100 at the start of the period of rising prices)  
  
Sources: DG AGRI, Refintiv and Comtrade.  
The importance of Chinese manufacturing sectors and primary energy 
exporters is amplified by their central role in the GVC. The importance of a 
sector in the GVC can be shown by weighting its connections as a 
provider/client by the number of backward/forward linkages with other sectors.  
With regard to energy import markets, European value chains rely heavily on 
Russian – and to a lesser extent Norwegian – primary sectors, while China holds a 
central position in the manufacturing sector (see Chart 7).  
Chart 7  
Value chain centrality, non- EU sectors, by geographic supplier (2019)  
(Katz -Bonacich index)  
 
Source: WIOD.  
Note: The Katz -Bonacich index is a network centrality measure which, in this case, measures the importance of an industry as a 
supplier in global supply chains.  y = 0.8389x
R² = 0.8301y = 0.9606x
R² = 0.9597
y = 0.6867x
R² = 0.7569
y = 0.2289x
R² = 0.1093
y = 0.0504x
R² = 0.0009
-60-40-20020406080100120
-80 -60 -40 -20 020 40 60 80100 120 140Cereals
Oils and fats
DairyMeat
Sugar
y=x
80100120140160180200
 S ep 06
Jan 07
May 07
Sep 07
Aug 08
Dec 09
Ap r 10
Aug 10
Dec 10
Sep 12
Jan 13
May 13
Sep 13
Mar 21
Jul 21
Nov 21
Mar 22Dairy -EU
Dairy -INT
0123456
CHN-
ElectronicsRUS-
M in ingCHN-
ChemicalsRUS-
Basic m etal sNOR-
M in ingCHN-
Basic m etal sUSA-
ChemicalsRUS-
Coke and
refined oilUSA-
Coke and
refined oilKO R-
Chemicals
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 38  
 As an open economy with a substantial trade surplus in manufacturing 
products, the EU is also central to the GVC, which entails a high exposure to 
foreign demand.  35% of the EU’s manufacturing GDP is absorbed outside the EU, 
much more than for other regions (see Chart 8). As for the main partners, around 8% of total value- added in the manufacturing sector is absorbed in the United States.  
Chart 8  
Aggregate export dependency at macro- sectoral level (2018)  
(percentages)  
 
Sources: Own elaboration with OECD (Trade in Value Added) data for 2018 and the Inter -Country Input -Output (icio) Stata tool (see 
Belotti et al., 202 1). 
Notes: Blue bars: EU value- added by sector of origin absorbed abroad/total EU value- added by sector of origin; yellow bars: Chinese 
value- added by sector of origin absorbed abroad/total Chinese value -added by sector of origin; orange bars: US value- added by 
sector of origin absorbed abroad/total US value- added by sector of origin.  
 
In terms of sectoral export dependence on China and the United States, the high exposure of the pharmaceuticals sector stands out.  The United States 
absorbs around a quarter of the total value- added generated in that sector and 
almost half of the total value- added exported in that sector (see Chart 9). For China, 
the exposure is much lower and, with the exception of machinery, focused on smaller sectors such as water transport  or other transport equipment. 
 0510152025303540
Agr icul ture Energy Manufacturing ServicesEU
China
United States
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 39  
 Chart 9  
EU direct and indirect bilateral export dependency at sectoral level (2018)  
a) EU exposure to Chinese demand  b) EU exposure to US demand  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Sources: Own elaboration with OECD (Trade in Value Added) data for 2018 and the Inter -Country Input -Output (icio) Stata tool (see 
Belotti et al., 2021).  
Notes: Panel a: EU value -added by sector of origin absorbed in China/total EU value- added by sector of origin; panel b: EU value-
added by sector of origin absorbed in the United States/total EU value- added by sector of origin.  
 
A heatmap may be a useful tool for summarising the EU’s trade dependency 
and identifying particularly vulnerable sectors.65 A heatmap makes use of three 
core dependency indicators ( see European Commission, 2021d).  For imports, 
dependency indicators reflect the import concentration, internal scarcity and substitutability of a product.
66 For EU exports, only export concentration and internal 
scarcity indices are used. To construct a heatmap, each index is aggregated at the 
macro -sector level67 and then standardised using the mean and standard deviation 
computed over the entire sector sample, so as to obtain a z -score.68 Sectors are 
then classified and color -coded according to the quantile to which their z -scores 
belong, with scores closer to red signalling a (relatively) higher potential vulnerability. 
Individual dependency indices can be aggregated to obtain an indication of “overall” dependency.
69 Moreover, column 5 of the heatmap accounts for the “political 
proximity” of partner countries by weighting the import concentration indicator with a 
 
65     For this analysis, we use trade data from the Base pour l’Analyse du Commerce International of the 
Centre d’études prospectives et d’informations internationals  (BACI-CEPII) at the HS -6 level.  
66     See Box 2.1 for a detailed description of the core dependency indices. For imports, the heatmaps 
use the information embedded in indicators CDI1 (concentration), CDI2 (scarcity) and CDI3 
(substitutability), as defined in Box 2.1. For exports, the heat maps use concentration and scarcity 
indicators (CDI1_X and CDI2_X respectively).  
67     This is necessary in the case of the CDIs applied to goods trade, which are originally computed at the 
six-digit level of aggregation. Building a fully disaggregated hea tmap using the five thousand six-digit 
level products of the CEPII database is feasible, but the result is impossible to present in a readable manner . 
 
68     For a discussion of the methodology see Aikman et al.  (2017) and IMF (2019).  
69     In the case of imports we apply  weights  of 0.5, 0.25 and 0.25 to concentration, scarcity and 
substitutability  respectively . For exports, the weights on concentration and scarcity are 2/3 and 1/3  
respectively .  0 2 4 6 8 10Fabricated metal productsMotor  vehi clesPharmaceuticalsAir transportChemical productsMining, non-energyElectrical equipmentBasic m etal sMachinery and equipmentComputer and electronicsOther transport equipmentWater transport
0 5 10 15 20 25Mi ning suppor tWater transportElectrical equipmentAir transportManufacturing: repairMotor  vehi clesOther transport equipmentMachinery and equipmentBasic m etal sChemical productsComputer and electronicsPharmaceuticals
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 40  
 country -specific score indicating “distance to the US -led Western order”, as derived 
from UN voting patterns.70 
At the sectoral level, import dependencies are particularly strong in primary 
products, while export dependencies are high in chemical products and the  
manufacturing of transport equipment (see Chart 9) . The vulnerability of import 
dependencies in mineral products is discussed in Section 2.1.2 (Energy). With regard to agricultural products, these combine high import and export concentration with internal scarcity and low substitutability. However, such products represent a 
small share of EU trade. Sectors that account for significant shares of EU trade, such 
as the manufacturing of machinery, transport equipment and chemical products, are characterised by higher substitutability and internal availability, although import 
concentration is high for some specific goods. At the same time, some of these 
sectors (such as the chemicals industry and the manufacturing of transport equipment) are characterised by strong export dependencies, due to high export 
concentration and relatively low internal demand. The fifth column shows that for the 
sector accounting for the highest share of imports (machinery/electrical equipment), 
the vulnerability of import concentration is higher  when the political proximity of 
partner countries is taken into account .  
 
Chart 10  
Summary heatmap of EU trade dependencies  
(quintiles)  
 
Sources: CEPII -BACI database, Bailey et al. (2017) and own calculations.  
Notes: The heatmap uses indicators of concentration, scarcity and substitutability as defined in Box 2.1. Sector -specific indicators are 
standardised by the mean and the standard deviation for the whole sample. Sectors are then classified and colour coded according to 
the quintile to which their z -scores belong, with scores closer to red signalling higher vulnerability. Individual indices are also 
aggregated to obtain an indication of “overall dependency”. The fifth column shows the import concentration index in which import shares are weighted with an indicator of “political proximity”, based on UN voting patterns and calculated following Bailey et al. (2017).  
 
Dependencies can also arise at the level of specific goods. The analysis 
reveals that a sizable p ortion of EU imports is either concentrated on few trade 
partners or is scarce in intra- EU trade  (see Chart 11). At the HS -6 product group 
level, energy products provide an example of EU imports that are reasonably well diversified, yet very scarce. The imports for some manufacturing products, such as computers, photovoltaic cells, LEDs or optical devices, are both very concentrated (in China) and scarce.  
 
70    See Bailey et al.  (2017).  Concetration +
political proximity % imports %  exports
Animals, animal products 1.6 1.8
Vegetable products 3.2 1.7
Foodstuffs 2.5 4.1
Mineral products 19.8 3.8
Chemicals industries 10.6 15.0
Plastics/rubber 3.5 18.0
Raw skins, leathers, etc. 0.7 0.8
Wood, wood products 1.5 2.2
Textiles 6.5 2.4
Footwear/headgear 1.4 0.6
Stone/glass 3.1 3.1
Metals 6.2 4.9
Machinery/electrical 23.4 21.7
Transportation 9.0 13.8
Miscellaneous 7.1 6.3EXPORTS IMPORTS
CONCENTRATION SCARCITY LOW SUBST. OVERALL CONCENTRATION SCARCITY OVERALL
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 41  
 Chart 11  
Concentration and scarcity of imports to the EU (2019)  
(x-axis: concentration index (CDI1); y -axis: scarcity (CDI2))  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on the CEPII BACI database.  
Notes: The horizontal axis shows the Herfindahl -Hirschman Concentration Index as a measure of import concentration at the product 
level, with a value of 0 denoting a continuum of sources and a value of 1 indicating one single external exporter. The vertical axis 
shows scarcity as the share of extra -EU in total imports. The bubble size represents the total value of extra- EU imports of a product. 
Red bubbles identify high -dependency products, whose concentration, scarcity and substitutability indexes exceed the critical 
thresholds defined by the European Commission (2021d).  For some of these products, the main exporter to the EU is shown in 
brackets. Yellow bubbles represent energy products (oil, gas and coal).  
By far the highest bilateral import concentration of the EU in goods trade is 
with China (with intra -EU trade excluded, see Chart 12).  The bilateral import 
concentration measures the degree to which exporting countries have a dominant export share of the goods they supply to the importer (for further details see Box 2.1). The reduction in imports from China due to the pandemic and the impact of this 
on European industries are analysed in Box 2.4. Other trade partners with which the 
EU has high bilateral import concentrations are the United States, the United Kingdom and also – because of the EU’s dependencies on energy products and key 
commodities such as nickel or uranium – Russia. Switching perspective shows that 
both the United States and China exhibit a high bilateral import concentration with the EU. The United States’ highest bilateral import concentration is with China, 
although the degree of dependency is lower than for the EU. US imports are also 
concentrated with North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) trade partners (NAFTA has now become the United States -Mexico -Canada Agreement, USMCA). 
China’s main import dependencies, in turn, are in the Asia- Pacific region. This shows 
that geographic proximity can drive import dependencies.  Almonds (U SA)Amino -ac i ds  (SGP)Insulin (USA)
Nickel mattes (RU S)
Automatic data  proce ssin g 
machines (CHN)Telephones (CH N )LEDs (CHN )Photovolta ic cells (CHN )Optical devices (CHN )
Watches (CH E)
0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 91. 0
0 0. 1 0. 2 0. 3 0. 4 0. 5 0. 6 0. 7 0. 8 0. 9 1
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 42  
 Chart 12  
Bilateral import concentration index (2019)  
a) European Union  b) United States  c) China  
(index)  (index)  (index)  
   
Source: Own elaboration based on the CEPII BACI database.  
Notes: Bilateral import concentration is measured by weighting the total extra- EU import value for each HS -6 product group for which 
the partner country is the main exporter to the EU by the respective import concentration index (CDI1).  
Export dependencies can arise from the concentration of exports in a few 
trade partners. While EU exports are normally well diversified, some products are exported to a handful of external partners (see Chart 13). A granular analysis 
of export dependence shows that exports of large, manufactured goods tend to be 
diversified across destinations to some extent, although their intra- EU demand can 
be relatively scarce (this is the case for large aeroplanes and medium -sized 
vehicles). Other goods – mainly pharmaceuticals and chemical products, high- tech 
manufactures, but  also some food products — are exported to just a few partners 
and are characterised by low internal demand.  
EU exports are strongly concentrated in the United States.  Other destinations 
with highly concentrated exports are the United Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, China and Switzerland (see Chart 14). US exports, for their part, are mostly concentrated in the EU and in NAFTA/USMCA countries. The United States is the main destination for Chinese products, although the EU is also a significant importer.  0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 40
CHN
USA
GBR
RUS
CHE
TUR
IDN
JPN
NOR
TWN0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 40
CHN
EU
MEX
CAN
JAP
MYS
BRA
VNM
GBR
TWN0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 40
EU
AUS
KO R
JAP
TWN
SAU
BRA
VNM
US
IDN
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 43  
 Chart 13  
Concentration of exports and scarcity of internal demand for the EU (2019)  
(x-axis: concentration index (CDI1_X); y -axis: scarcity of internal demand (CDI2_X))  
 
Source: Own elaboration based on the CEPII BACI database.  
Notes: The horizontal axis shows the Herfindahl -Hirschman Index as a measure of export concentration at the product level, with a 
value of 0 denoting a perfectly diversified destination and 1 indicating one single external importer. The vertical axis show s scarcity of 
internal demand as the share of extra- EU in total exports. The bubble size represents the total value of extra- EU exports of a product. 
Red bubbles identify high -dependency products, whose concentration and scarcity indexes exceed the critical  thresholds defined by 
the European Commission (2021d). For some of these products, the main importer from the EU is shown in brackets. Yellow bubbl es 
identify representative products characterised by relatively scarce internal demand but a diversified export base.  
Chart 14  
Bilateral Export Concentration Index (2019)  
a) European Union  b) United States  c) China  
(index)  (index)  (index)  
   
Source: Own elaboration based on the CEPII BACI database.  
Notes: Bilateral export concentration is measured by weighting the total extra- EU export value for each HS -6 product group for which 
the partner country is the main importer from the EU by the respective export concentration index (CDI1_X).  
The EU is the largest exporter and importer of services in the world . The 
importance of the EU´s trade in services has grown significantly in the past decade, 
with the value of exports and imports of services equalling 13.2% of EU GDP in 
2021. Taking extra and intra- EU trade in services together, the EU represented 30% 
of the world’s trade in services in 2021. The significant global position, the large Vehicles (USA)Aeroplanes (CH N )Pork meat (CHN )Frozen pork mea t (CHN )
Heterocyclic comp un d s 
(USA)Insulin (CH N )
Polypeptide h ormon es (USA)
Inmunological pro d u ct s 
(USA)Diamonds (IN D )
Gold (CHE)Railway co aches (GBR )
Cruise ship s (U SA)
0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 91. 0
0. 0 0. 1 0. 2 0. 3 0. 4 0. 5 0. 6 0. 7 0. 8 0. 9 1. 0
0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 400. 45
USA
GBR
CHN
CHE
TUR
JPN
RUS
NOR
CAN
BRA0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 400. 45
MEX
EU
CAN
CHN
UK
TWN
JPN
KO R
BRA
VNM0. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 300. 350. 400. 45
USA
HKG
EU
JPN
VNM
KO R
IND
IDN
BRA
BG D
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 44  
 export share and the relatively diversified trade partners provide resilience against 
import vulnerabilities at the aggregate level.71 
A number of key sectors display high values of import concentration and 
internal scarcity: the financial services; telecommunication, computer and 
information services; and royalties and license fees sectors are the most 
concentrated and internally scarce.  EU imports of services display the highest 
concentration in the royalties and license fees and financial services sectors  (see 
Chart 15).72 Imports of travel and transport services are, by contrast, the least 
concentrated.73 At the same time, the scarcity indicator shows that the share of 
extra-EU imports in many service sectors is high, especially in financial services, 
telecommunication, computer and information services, and royalties and license 
fees, which seem the most vulnerable, in terms of both concentration and internal 
scarcity.  
The United States and the United Kingdom are the EU’s largest trade partners 
in terms of imports of financial services, although various offshore financial 
centres (the Cayman Islands, Bermuda and the Bahamas) also play a key role.  
The EU’s main trading partners are the United States (22% of the total), offshore 
financial centres (20%) and the United Kingdom (18%), while other countries 
account for much smaller shares of extra- EU imports (see Chart 16). The 
telecommunication, computer and Information sector is  the most reliant on extra- EU 
partners (the United States, the United Kingdom, Switzerland and India account for 70%) and, currently, the ability of the EU to substitute these imports is a key aspect 
of strategic dependency, especially in specific sub- sectors like cybersecurity and IT 
software.  
 
71     However, there are strategic sectors and specific sub -sectors which require greater attention. See 
European Commission  (2022c) regarding cybersecurity and specific IT software.  
72     Imports of royalties reflect EU payments to extra -EU partners for the use of intellectual property (e.g. 
patents, trademarks, copyrights and franchises).  
73     See Box 2.1 for a detailed descript ion of the indicators used to measure concentration, scarcity and 
substitutability. Due to the different level of aggregation, the concentration index in Chart 14 cannot 
be compared to its equivalent for granular goods trade, which is used in Chart 11.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 45  
 Chart 15  
Concentration and scarcity of services imports in the EU (2019)  
(x-axis: Herfindahl -Hirschman Index (CDI1); y -axis: scarcity of extra -EU imports (CDI2))  
 
Source: Eurostat ITS database.  
Notes: The horizontal axis shows the Herfindahl -Hirschman Index as a measure of import concentration of extra- EU imports of 
services (CDI1). The vertical axis shows scarcity of extra -EU imports (CDI2). The bubble size represents the import share. Yellow 
bubbles identify strategic sectors. See Box 2.1 for additional details.  
Chart 16  
Main geographical counterparts of EU imports of services in selected sectors (2019)  
(percentages)  
 
Sources: Eurostat ITS database and BPM6.  
Note: The selected sectors covered by the chart are: research and development, professional management & consulting, 
transportation, travel, finance, insurance, computer and information services, and royalties and license fees.  
In terms of the export of services, the largest trade partners are the United 
Kingdom and the United States.  The former is the destination of 21% of total EU 
exports, while the United States accounts for 18%. Other important partners are Switzerland (8%), offshore financial centres (8%) and China (5%). The most important sectors for extra- EU exports are: transportation; travel services; 
telecommunication, computer and information services; and R&D and management services. Together these account for more than 70% of all extra- EU service exports. 
EU service exports are relatively well diversified among trading partners (see Chart 
17). The most concentrated sectors are transport services and R&D and Manufacturing servicesMaintenance & repair 
services
Transport services
Travel services
Construction
Insurance and pension 
servicesFinancial servicesRoyalties and license 
fees
Telecommunication, 
computer & information 
servicesR&D, professional 
management & 
consulting, technical 
and trade
Personal, cultural & 
recreactional services
Government servicesOther services
0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 8
0. 0 0. 1 0. 2 0. 3 0. 4

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 46  
 management services, where around 20% and 15% of the value- added are 
absorbed by the United States and China respectively.  
Chart 17  
Aggregate foreign export dependency in services at macro- sectoral level (2018)  
(percentages)  
 
Source: Own elaboration with OECD (Trade in Value Added) data for 2018 and the Inter -Country Input -Output (icio) Stata tool (see 
Belotti et al., 2021).  
2.2 Energy dependencies  
Energy dependence is one of the key sources of the EU’s foreign trade 
exposure. At the current juncture, the reliance on imported fossil fuels has increased 
the exposure of the EU to geopolitical risk. This has direct implications for monetary policy, as the energy sector is a key sector and one of the most difficult to substitute. 
In the future there is likely to be a switch from fossil fuels to renewable sources. In 
this sense, the debates over strategic interdependence and the energy transition are intertwined, as the production of less carbon intensive energy sources (i.e. nuclear and renewables) is usually higher in Europe.  
Most of the energy consumed in the EU is imported. In 2020, more than 55% of energy consumed in the EU was imported from an extra -EU country.  The share 
of imported energy has gradually increased over the past 30 years (see Chart 18), 
mainly due to: (i) the decline in the domestic production of fossil fuels (in the 1990s 
around half  of the natural gas consumed and 80% of coal and other solid fossil fuels 
consumed were domestic, compared with 20% and 60% respectively in recent 
years); and (ii) the substitution of coal with natural gas (and to a lesser extent oil), 
which has more imported content. In recent years the importance of renewable energy sources within the energy mix has increased, but this increase is still not 
sufficient – at least not yet – to reverse the trend in energy imports and counter the 
two forces dominant in explaining the overall trend.  
Energy dependence is very heterogeneous across European sectors and 
countries.  Countries with high renewable shares in energy production (Denmark, 05101520253035
Maint enance,
 repair serv.Transport
serv.Travel
serv.Construction Financial,
insuranceTelecomm. ,
 inf ormationR&D,
consultingPer sonal,
 recre.  serv.Gov. serv. Other
servicesEU
China
United States
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 47  
 Finland and Sweden), high nuclear capacity (Bulgaria, France, Slovakia and 
Sweden) or  high domestic production of fossil fuels (Czech Republic, Poland and 
Romania) show lower energy dependency (see Chart 19). In terms of sectors, 
manufacturing sectors such as chemicals, plastic and metals, as well as the transport sector, are more intensive in their energy use (see Chart 20).  
Chart 18  
EU foreign dependency in the energy mix since the 1990s  
(percentages)  
 
Source: Eurostat.  
Chart 19  
Energy consumption as a share of gross available energy by source, pre- war (2020)  
(percentages)  
 
Source: Eurostat.  
Notes: “Imports (rest)” includes all other import origins. In the cases of countries with a high energy transit of Russian sources, such as 
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Slovakia and Finland, the share of Russian energy of gross available energy might be overestimated. “Domestic traditional fossil fuel” includes coal, gas and oil. “Other” includes other domestic sources of energy not 
included in the previous two.  
It is with regard to crude oil, natural gas, coal and uranium that EU  Member 
States have the most vulnerable external dependencies. Chart 21 summarises 
the information provided by the import dependency indicators (CDIs) constructed 
previously with the aim of identifying those sectors whose external dependencies are 
particul arly vulnerable. The chart confirms that crude oil and natural gas are 0102030405060
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
0102030405060708090100
Malta
Cyprus
Luxembourg
Greece
Belgium
Lithuania
Italy
Ireland
Netherlands
Spain
Port ugal
Ger many
Au str ia
Hungary
Slovakia
Cro at ia
Slovenia
Latvia
Den ma rk
France
Poland
Finland
Czechia
Bulgaria
Sweden
Romania
Est oniaImports (rest)
Imports (Russia)
Domestic traditional fossil fuelsRenewables and nuclear
Other
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 48  
 internally scarce and difficult to substitute. Imports of natural gas in a gaseous state 
are also very concentrated, whereas those of crude oil and liquefied natural gas 
(LNG) are relatively diversified, reflecting the global nature of these markets. The chart shows that LNG has a low import concentration. As things currently stand, 
however, some EU Member States have a strong need for LNG, meaning that 
existing LNG terminal capacity is insufficient. In this respect, the low import concentration shown underestimates actual demand. In general, a greater overall 
dependency is related to a relatively low number of potential providers because of 
geographical or infrastructure constraints, and thus to greater difficulty in substituting import sources. The chart also shows that the import sourcing of uranium and coal 
products is particularly vulnerable. The fifth column shows that some of the 
exposures change when the political proximity of trade partners is taken into 
account. Import concentration becomes more vulnerable in non- crude petroleum oil 
and in coke, and less so in coal products.  
Chart 20  
Value- added of the energy sector embedded in the EU’s final demand, by sector of 
economic activity (2018)  
(percentages)  
 
Source: OECD (Trade in Value Added).  
Chart 21  
EU import dependencies in energy products  
(quintiles)  
 
Source: CEPII -BACI database, Bailey et al. (2017) and own calculations.  02468101214
Basic m etal s
Air transport
Chemicals
Water transport
Non-met allic mineral prod.
Land transport
Rubber  and plastics
Wood and paper
Text ile s
Metal products
Electr ical  eq.
Agr icul ture
Water supply
Food
Warehousing
Computers
Machinery
Other manuf.
Transport eq.
Construction
Accom odations and food
Pharmaceuticals
Trade
Information and…
Public Administration
Other business sector serv.
Financial serv.
Real estate
Concentration + 
CONCENTRATION SCARCITY LOW SUBST. O VERALL political proximity
Crude oil 57.59
Petroleum oil, not crude 22.59
Natural gas, in gaseous state 8.85
Natural gas, liquified 3.93
Coal 3.22
Propane, liquified 1.26
Electrical energy 0.89
Biodiesel 0.78
Butane, liquified 0.36
Enriched uranium 0.24
Wood, for fuel 0.17
Coke and semi-coke 0.12
Peat 0.01% ENERGY 
IMPORTS
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 49  
 Notes: The heatmap uses indicators of import concentration, scarcity and substitutability, as defined in Box 2.1. Sector -specific 
information is standardised by the mean and standard deviation of the whole sample. Sectors are then classified and colour -codded 
according to the quintile to which their z -scores belong, with scores closer to red signalling higher vulnerability. Individual indices are 
also aggregated to obtain an indication of “overall dependency”. The fifth column shows the import concentration index (CDI1)  in which 
import shares are weighted with an indicator of “political proximity”, based on UN voting patterns and calculated following Bailey et al. 
(2017).  
Russia has, until recently, been the main European trading partner for energy 
products.  In 2019 it accounted for 29% of imported oil, ar ound 40% of imported 
natural gas (see Chart 22) and 54% of imported coal. In turn, Norway accounted for 
8% of oil imports and 21% of gas imports. The share of Russian gas is higher (and 
imports are more concentrated) for EU countries that are supplied mainly through 
pipelines, while countries with LNG capacity had a more diversified import base 
before the invasion of Ukraine.  
Since 2021, and especially after the invasion of Ukraine, Russia has practically halted its pipeline exports.  This immediately prompt ed European countries to 
search for alternative suppliers. LNG imports increased by about 23 billion cubic 
metres in 2022 since a year ago (see Chart 23), with existing plants working at 100% 
of installed capacity and new plants being built in Lithuania and Finland, which were 
largely able to replace their Russian gas imports almost immediately. Moreover, 
additional pipeline imports were sourced from Norway and Azerbaijan.  
However, only a limited share of total gas imports from Russian pipelines can be subs tituted in the short run.  Due to insufficient integration of the internal market 
(as a result of limited cross -border pipeline flow capacity between some countries), 
LNG imports arriving in western Europe cannot be delivered to central Europe, 
leaving some regasification (and storage) capacity unused. Countries without LNG 
capacity generally tend to hold higher inventories (see Chart 24), although in the 
long run additional gas resources or substitution by other energy sources will be 
necessary.  
The main obstacle to the substitution of natural gas is the huge concentration 
in some exporters.  It is difficult to build up additional gas extraction and LNG 
production capacities (as well as LNG regasification capacity in destination 
countries) as this involves hefty investment and lengthy execution times. Incentives 
to do this are also fraught with uncertainty because profitability can only be ensured 
for a sufficiently long projected lifespan and long- term supply contracts.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 50  
 Chart 22  
EU dependency on Russian natural gas by country (2019)  
(percentages)  
 
Source: Own calculations based on Eurostat data.  
Notes: Figures in the country labels represent the percentage of gas imports from Russia via pipeline.  
Chart 23  
Substitution of Russian pipeline gas with alternativ e sources (2022)  
a) Year -on-year change in LNG imports  b) EU imports of natural gas, by origin  
(million cubic metres, cumulative flows Jan -Jun. 2022)  (million cubic metres, year -on-year change)  
  
Sources: Own calculations based on Eurostat (panel a) and Bruegel (panel b) figures.  
Notes: Panel a: Change in LNG imports is shown as the year -on-year change in cumulated flows (in volume terms) from January to 
June. Figures for countries with an asterisk (*) show cumulative flows for the period Ja nuary -July (instead of for January -June). Panel 
b depicts the year -on-year change in weekly flow data (in terms of four -week moving averages) from different sources of EU gas 
imports, in order to identify new sourcing patterns (and remaining shortfalls) in the efforts made by the EU (relative to 2021) to replace 
Russian gas in 2022.  0102030405060708090100
Hungary (86 %)
Latvia (100 %)
Finland (101 %)
Est onia (110 %)
Czech Rep. (116 %)
Slovenia (15 %)
Slovakia (133 %)
Bulgaria (109 %)
Ger many (87 %)
Lithuania (86 % )
Poland (120 %)
EU (85 %)
Italy (117 %)
Greece (81 %)
Netherlands (74 %)
Luxembourg (100 %)
France (42 %)
Romania (238 % )
Spain (0 %)
Port ugal (0 %)
Belgium (0 % )
United K ingdom (0 % )Percentage oftotal imports (natural gas)
Percentage of total energy consumption (all fuels)
05, 00010,00015,00020,00025,000
01, 0002, 0003, 0004, 0005, 0006, 0007, 0008, 0009, 000
France*
Spain
Netherlands*
Belgium*
Italy
Poland
Port ugal
Greece
Cr oati a*
Lithuania
Bulgaria
EU27 (right scale)From Russia
Other exporters
-3-2-10123
04/21 07/21 10/21 01/22 04/22 07/22Russia
Norway
Algeria
LNG
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 51  
 Chart 24  
LNG capacity and inventories in EU Member States  
(percentage of gas consumption)  
 
Sources: Own calculations based on BP data on consumption and Bruegel storage data (October 2022).  
Notes: Figures for cumulative flows for LNG capacity (blue bars) and inventories (yellow bars) are depicted relative to overall total gas 
consumption, in percentages.  
 
2.3 Critical raw materials dependencies  
The European Commission considers 30 raw materials to be critical, based on 
an evaluation across two dimensions.74 In terms of economic relevance, the 
importance of a material is determined by the sum of its end-use shares in each 
sector of economic activity, multiplied by the value- added of that sector. T he 
assessment also considers a substitutability factor that takes into account multiple possible substitutes, according to a cost -performance evaluation. In terms of supply 
risk, aspects such as import reliance, sourcing country concentration and recycling rates are relevant and will be considered in more detail in this section. Similarly to the granular study of general import dependency presented previously, the import 
dependency of the EU is analysed here in respect of critical raw materials (CRMs), 
following the methodology outlined in European Commission (2021d).
75 In 2019, the 
EU imported more than USD 15 billion of CRMs from extra- EU sources (equivalent 
to 0.1% of EU GDP). Chart 25 summarises the results of this analysis.  
 
74     See European Commission  (2020e).  
75     Based on BACI -CEPII data for bilateral trade flows at six -digit level. Six -digit level data make it 
possible to provide  results for 25 CRM s out of the 30 identified in European Commission  (2020e). 
The HS codes from European Commission  (2020f)  are used, corresponding to both the extraction 
and the processing stage. In this sense, the data reflect both raw materials and intermediate 
products containing large qua ntities of raw materials and/or intermediate products that are 
indispensable for CRMs to be processed and embedded in final products. Also, the whole trade value 
relative to the HS codes from European Commission  (2020f)  is employed in the calculations.  
Applying the percentages of CRM content from European Commission  (2020f)  and other sources to 
the import value of the HS codes yields a lower EU import share from Russia (13%), although the country remains the main import  source for the EU for products of this kind.  050100150200250
Spain
Port ugal
Cro at ia
France
Belgium
Netherlands
Italy
Poland
Latvia
Au str ia
Slovakia
Hungary
Den ma rk
Czech Rep.
Romania
Ger many
Bulgaria
Sweden
IrelandLNG capacity
Inventories
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 52  
 Chart 25  
EU critical raw materials import dependency (2019)  
(x-axis: concentration index (CDI1); y -axis: scarcity (CDI2))  
 
Source: Own calculations based on the CEPII BACI database.   
Notes: CRMs as  defined in European Commission ( 2020e), except for coking coal, gallium, germanium, hafnium and indium, which 
are not included in the graph. The HS codes from European Commission (2020f ) available at the six -digit level are used, 
corresponding to both the extraction and the processing stage, and the whole trade value relative to the HS codes is employed in the 
calculations. Internal scarcity: extra- EU/total EU imports (CDI2). Import concentration: Herfindahl -Hirschman index (CDI1). Bubble 
area is proportional to the value of extra- EU imports. Main exporter to the EU in parenthesis. Yellow bubbles identify the materials 
whose concentration, scarcity and substitutability indexes exceed the thresholds defined in European Commission (2021d). China is 
the EU’s main import source of antimony, barite, bismuth, magnesium, graphite, rare earths and scandium, and tungsten; Russia of cobalt, palladium, phosphate rock and vanadium; the United Kingdom of iridium, osmium and ruthenium, and rhodium; the United States of beryllium and platinum; Guinea of bauxite; Turkey of borates; Mexico of fluorspar; Chile of lithium; Indonesia of natural rubber; Brazil of niobium and tantalum; Norway of silicon metal; Japan of strontium; Kazakhstan of phosphorus and Sierra Leone of titani um. 
 
Most CRMs are scarce within the EU, as measured by the ratio of extra- EU 
imports over value of total imports.  For some CRMs, EU imports are also highly 
concentrated in a few trading partners. Of all the scarce and concentrated materials, 
the seven marked in yellow in the chart (beryllium, borates, cobalt, lithium, magnesium, niobium and phosphorus) would be impossible to fully substitute with 
European production
76 if extra- EU imports were to face some kind of limitation. We 
identify these CRMs as those of greatest dependency for the EU. The share of EU 
imports of CRMs from different extra- EU partners is displayed in Chart 26, panel (a). 
In 2019, the highest share of CRMs, in terms of import value, was sourced from Russia (18%). Other significant sources  of CRMs for the EU are the United Kingdom 
and the United States (with more than 9% each) and, among emerging economies, 
South Africa, Brazil and China (close to 6% each). As regards the seven CRMs of 
high dependency, Russia, China and Brazil are among the leading exporters to the EU. Russia provides 70% of European imports of cobalt, Brazil 87% of those of magnesium and China 89% of those of niobium.  
 
76     Production is proxied by total exports (intra -EU and extra -EU) as production data is not available at 
the required level of disaggregation.  Beryllium (USA)
Borates (TUR)Cobalt (RUS)
Lithium (CHL) Magnesium (CHN)Rubber (IDN)
Niobium (BRA)
Palladium (RUS)Platinum (USA)Rhodium (GBR)Phosphate Rock (RUS)
Phosphorus (KAZ)
0. 00. 20. 40. 60. 81. 01. 2
0 0. 1 0. 2 0. 3 0. 4 0. 5 0. 6 0. 7 0. 8 0. 9 1
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 53  
 Chart 26  
Share of value of critical raw materials imports by country of origin (2019)  
a) European Union  b) United States  c) China  
(index)  (index)  (index)  
   
Source: Own calculations based on the CEPII BACI database.  
Note: CRMs are defined as in Chart 25.  
Demand is bound to increase for several CRMs in the near future.  Transition to 
a carbon- neutral economy employs many technologies that rely heavily on CRMs. In 
particular, permanent magnets require borates and rare earths and are key to a 
variety of applications, especially wind turbines and e- mobility ( European 
Commission , 2020g ). The same holds for the ongoing digitalisation process, in which 
five out of the seven CRMs of highest dependency for the EU are considered key inputs. 3D printers as well as magnetic RAM modules are examples of specific 
products relying on these CRMs. According to the European Commission, demand for some of these could increase more than fivefold by 2030.  
Reuse and recycling could be one way to reduce external dependency on 
CRMs.  So far, rates of recycling and reuse have remained low for most CRMs. 
Rates are as high as 42% for tungsten but remain at one- digit values for the majority 
of CRMs ( European Commission, 2020e ). Among the subgroup of CRMs that cannot 
be fully substituted, there is no recycling and reuse at all for beryllium, niobium, and 
phosphorus. Retention rates are higher for magnesium (13%) and cobalt (22%).  
Other major economic areas such as the United States and China also show a high level of dependency on CRMs. Chart 26, panels (b) and (c) illustrate the CRM 
dependency of the United States and China respectively. In 2019, China imported more than USD 16 billion (0.11% of GDP) and the United States around USD 13 billion (0.06% of GDP) of CRMs.  As regards source countries, the United States is 
highly dependent on the EU, as more than 17% of the CRMs imported by the country comes from the EU.
77 China, for its part, is heavily reliant on African exporters, with 
nearly 25% of its imports sourced from Guinea and the Congo. CRMs imports also 
seem to follow regional patterns, with the United States sourcing comparatively more 
from NAFTA countries and China more from the Asia- Pacific region than other global 
importers. China also displays a higher concentration of CRM imports at the country 
 
77     Mainly palladium, rhodium and platinum, which are re-expor ted to the United States from Germany 
and Belgium.  0% 10% 20%CANMARVNMMYSCIVGINTHANORCHEIDNCHNBRAZAFUSAGBRRUS
0% 10% 20%PERAUSSG PCHENORJPNTHABRAMEXCHNGBRCANIDNRUSZAFEU
0% 10% 20%HKGTURVNMGBRRUSZAFKO RMYSIDNUSABRAEUAUSTHACODGIN
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 54  
 level in comparison with the EU and the United States as it imports large quantities 
of bauxite, rubber and cobalt, with imports concentrated in just a few exporters 
(Guinea, Thailand and the Congo respectively).78 
2.4 Digital transition  
The rapid digital transformation of the European economies is of crucial importance in the context of the global digital transition.  However, the EU is 
facing challenges stemming from the need to catch up with regard to the use of digital solutions and the dependence of digital technologies and services on imports. The EU lags behind other advanced economies and major competitors when it  
comes to overall digital performance, according to the European Commission’s International Digital Economy and Society Index (I -DESI) (see Chart 27).
79 
Chart 27  
Overall digital performance of the EU -27 compared with other advanced economies 
(2018)  
(I-DESI in points, 2018)  
 
Source: European Commission.  
Notes: I- DESI measures the digital economy performance of EU27 Member States and the EU as a whole in comparison with 18 other 
countries around the world: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, 
Serbia, South Korea, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States. I -DESI consists of five weighted sub- indices 
(connectivity, digital skills, use of internet, digital technology and digital public services). Data are normalised ranging from 0 to 100 
with higher figures indicating higher digitalisation. The latest data for I -DESI are for 2018. For further details see I- DESI 2020: How 
digital is Europe compared to other major world economies?  
 
78     Import concentration at the country level is measured by the sum of product -level Herfindahl -
Hirschman Indexes of import concentration weighted by the respective import values (see Box 2.1 for 
additi onal details). It is worth mentioning that China’s high import concentration of bauxite, the main 
input material for aluminium production could, in principle, affect European industries if bauxite sourcing issues affecting China resulted in a global alumin ium shortage.  
79     I-DESI is a comprehensive indicator which provides an overview of the state of digitalisation in the 
EU and 18 third countries. It is comprised of five components: i) connectivity, (ii) human capital, (iii) use of internet, (iv) integration of digital technologies in the corporate sector and (v) digital public services. Data are from 2018. For a detailed description of the methodology, see European 
Commission  (2020h).  This chapter does not present the results for individual EU Member States, as 
it aims to provide a horizontal overview of the EU -27. Nevertheless, I -DESI points to strong 
heterogeneity in the state of digitalisation within the EU. For more details on the results for individual 
EU Member States, see European Commission  (2020h).   0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80EU-27New ZealandKor eaCanadaJapanIsraelUnited K ingdomAustraliaIcel andSwitzerlandNorwayUnited S tat es
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 55  
 With regard to the EU’s corporate sector, there is significant room for 
improvement in the use of digital solutions as well as strong heterogeneity in 
the use of individual technologies.  A breakdown of Eurostat data80 on the use of 
several digital technologies in the corporate sector shows that the use of enterprise 
resource planning software (ERP software81), cloud-c omputing services, supply 
chain management and – with a somewhat greater distance – the internet of things 
is more widespread than the use of big data analysis, 3D -printing and artificial 
intelligence, as shown in Chart 28. Moreover, the chart shows that t here is relatively 
high heterogeneity in the use of cloud computing (interquartile gap of 27 percentage 
points) and in the use of supply chain management (interquartile gap of 25 percentage points) among EU Member States.  
Chart 28  
Use of digital technologies in the corporate sector of EU Member States (2020)  
(values for 2020 as a percentage of corporates, multiple entries possible) 1) 
 
Source: Eurostat.  
Notes: The size of the boxes indicates the interquartile distance and, therefore, the dispersion of the values. The median (solid line) 
and the mean (cross) are shown in each box. At the end of the antenna are the values that either exceed the interquartile distance by 
1.5 times (maximum values) or fall below it (minimum values). Data outside this range are defined as outliers and are represented by a 
dot. 
1) Data on ERP software from 2019.  
Difficulties in the rapid adoption of digital technologies may stem from 
structural weaknesses in the EU economies in terms of infrastructure, digital skills of the population and regulation.  First, with regard to infrastructure, 
according to the OECD
82 and the results of research presented in the empirical 
literature,83 a likely explanation as to why EU enterprises need to catch up in the 
field of digitalisation is weaknesses in network capacities . Eurostat data for 2021 
show that only 52% of enterprises in the EU -27 had a high -speed internet 
 
80     Data from Eurostat. For explanatory notes and meta data see Eurostat  (ICT usage in enterprises 
(isoc_e)).  
81     ERP software is a product in which various modules are available for planning, recording and 
managing business activities (e.g. materials management, financial accounting and human 
resources).  
82     See OECD  (2020).  
83     See Andrews et al.  (2018) and De Backer et al.  (2017).  

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 56  
 connection,84 indicating an urgent need to catch up in order to manage the digital 
transition successfully. Second, employees’ digital skills are also important in the use 
of digital technologies, as shown by Andrews et al. (2018) and Gal et al. (2019). 
According to Eurostat’s Digital Skill s Index 2.0 (DSI 2.0),85 in 2021, 26% of the 
population aged between 16 and 64 years had above- average digital skills; 27% had 
average digital skills and 47% had little to no digital knowledge. A lack of information and communications technology (ICT) spec ialists also fits this picture. According to 
Eurostat data, 38% of firms seeking ICT specialists were not able to fill their vacancies as the applicants lacked the required skills.
86 Finally, results from the 
empirical literature point to the impact of int ernational competition, rigidities in labour 
and product markets and the availability of risk capital on the use of digital technologies
 87. In particular, the OECD indicator for barriers to entry in services and 
network sectors points to significantly low er barriers in leading advanced economies 
than in the EU.88  
In addition, given the rising volume of data processed in cloud infrastructures, dependencies in this sector will become even more important during the 
digital transition. However, market providers have been limited to only major 
companies from third countries, given the required levels of cutting- edge innovation, 
a lack of investment from other areas, network externalities and first -mover 
advantages.
89 This market structure could create entry bar riers for new or smaller 
companies, reduce the ability to control the use of sensitive personal data and create 
risks of further concentration of the market through anti -competitive practices.  
It is also important to analyse the possible vulnerabilities th at may arise from 
the lack of an appropriate framework which would facilitate access to the 
privately held data used to produce official statistics and make it easier to 
produce highly transparent, reliable and granular statistics.  Although the ESCB 
relies  primarily on data collections governed by regulations and guidelines, many 
refinements in the statistical framework could be facilitated through access to third-
party data handled by “big tech” or “big data” enterprises. Against this backdrop, the 
EU has launched an EU data strategy, including the drafting of the Data Governance 
Act and the Data Act (see Box 3.3). At this stage, the framework does not address 
 
84     A minimum download rate of 100 Mbit/s was assumed for 5G operators looking to buy a frequency 
band during the frequency auction in some EU Member States (including Germany). Therefore, all 
internet connections with a download speed of  (at least) 100 Mbit/s, 500 Mbit/s or 1 Gbit/s are 
considered in this analysis. For detailed information on the 5G -auctions in the EU Member States 
see National 5G Strategies – 5G Observatory . 
85     It is a composite indicator of five areas: (i) information and data literacy skills, (ii) communication and 
collaboration skills, (iii) digital content creation skills, (iv) safety and (v) problem solving skills. For a detailed description and metadata see Eurostat’s Individuals' level of digital skills (from 2021 
onwards) . (isoc_sk_dskl_i21) (europa.eu) .  
86     For the data see Eurostat statistics .  
87     See Andrews et al.  (2015), Andrews and Criscuolo  (2013), Perla et al.  (2015) and Bloom et al.  
(2012).  
88     A sub-component of the product market regulation (PMR) index. For more information on the PMR 
see Indicators of Product Market Regulation -  OECD .  
89     See also European Commission , 2021 d. According  to Synergy Research Group’s data, a few EU 
cloud and telco providers (OVH cloud, Deutsche Telecom, Orange and KPN) challenge the popularity 
of the global players to a limited extent, within selected national markets in the EU. See Synergy 
Research Group  (2021).  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 57  
 the key concerns of official statistics, which include access to privately held third-
party data or the development of the key infrastructural elements of an EU data 
framework, such as the legal entity indicator (LEI). These concerns are both highly 
relevant to the efficient and effective provision of data to support evidence- based 
policymaking. The EU  data strategy includes the setting up of “data spaces”, which 
include one dedicated to financial data. These data spaces are important tools supporting the strategic ability of the EU to handle, protect and disseminate data. 
Meanwhile, the impact on the E SCB of these key infrastructural elements of the EU 
data strategy has still to be assessed.  
 
  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 58  
 2.5 Financial interdependencies  
2.5.1  Cross -border investment and financial linkages  
The euro area is characterised by a high degree of financial openness. Not only 
is the euro area more financially open than the United States and China, it is also 
more financially open than the average open advanced economy (see Chart 29, 
panel a). Over t he past decade external asset and liability positions have averaged 
almost 480% of GDP in the euro area, compared with 320% in the United States and 
170% in China (including Hong Kong).90 Euro area members also intermediate a 
large share of global financia l flows on both the asset and the liability side, including 
substantial intra- area flows (see Chart 30). As discussed by the ECB strategy review 
(Work stream on globalisat ion, 2021), the pace of global financial integration slowed 
after the global financial crisis (GFC), following the unprecedented rise seen before the crisis. FDI flows remained resilient in the wake of the GFC, while portfolio debt and bank flows collapsed. Since 2018, however, the euro area has experienced 
subdued FDI flows, whereas portfolio and bank flows have picked up.
91 At the same 
time, financial integration within the euro area has continued to increase.  
The euro area is also home to a number of inv estment hubs whose importance 
has increased since the GFC. The euro area is home to six investment hubs 
(Belgium, Ireland, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Malta and the Netherlands), whose cross -
border positions dwarf even those of other global financial centres (see Chart 29, 
panel b).92 They intermediate most of the euro area FDI flows, although only a small 
share of these flows stay in the domestic economy as the remainder transit through 
to other intra and extra- euro area destinations. Not only are FDI flows interm ediated 
by these investment hubs larger, they are also more volatile than the FDI flows recorded by the other euro area members.  
The EU´s main FDI partners are other advanced economies, in particular the 
United States, the United Kingdom and Switzerland.
93 Together, the United 
States, the United Kingdom and Switzerland account for almost 60% of EU inward 
and outward FDI stocks over the past 20 years, while other advanced economies 
have been responsible for a further 10% (see Chart 31). China (including Hong Kong) has been responsible for around 3% of EU outward and inward FDI. Other 
relevant destinations for EU FDI include the LATAM countries (6%), Russia (3%) and 
 
90     For the EU, the average value of external asset and liability positions stood at 390% of GDP over the 
period from 20 14 (the earliest year with available data) to 2021.  
91     These subdued dynamics are largely due to the US tax reform enacted in 2018, and led to 
disinvestment, changes in intra-group positions and the repatriation of profits. As discussed below, 
the euro area was particularly affected by the presence of investment hubs, which act as a conduit 
for FDI.  
92     For a definition of cross -border financial centres/investment hubs, as well as a list of euro area hubs, 
see Pogliani and Wooldridge  (2022) and Di Nino et al. (2020).  
93     The discussion on FDI is at the EU, not the euro area, l evel, as it is for the rest of the section. This is 
because disaggregated data by partner countries and sectors of economic activity, and special purpose entity (SPE) data, are only available at the EU level.   
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 59  
 the Euromed group, including Turkey (2%). Overall, EMEs still represented a small 
source of EU inward FDI.  
Chart 29  
The euro area is more financially open than most of its partners and is home to major investment hubs  
a) External financial asset and liability 
positions in the euro area and other major 
economies  b) External financial asset and liability 
positions in financial centres  
(percentage of GDP)  (percentage of GDP)  
  
Sources: Lane and Milesi -Ferretti (2022), IMF BoP Statistics, Eurostat and own calculations.  
Notes: In panel a, the lines show the sum of gross external financial asset and liability stocks as a percentage of GDP. The “EA” line 
shows extra -euro area positions only, while the “EU” line shows extra- EU positions only (data only available since 2014).  The “Other 
AE” line shows the median value for the following group of countries: UK, CHE, JAP, AUS, CAN, NZ, NOR and KOR. The “Other EME ” 
line shows the median value for the following group of countries: BRA, IND, RUS, MEX, TUR, THA, IDN, MEX and ZAF. In panel b, the 
blue and yellow lines show the sum of gross stocks of external assets and liabilities for the group of six euro area investment hubs (BEL, NLD, LUX, CYP, IRE and MLT) and for the rest of the euro area members respectively, as a percentage of each group´s GDP . These positions include both intra and extra- euro area positions. The blue line shows the median value for the following group of 
countries: UK, CHE, SNG and HK.  
Chart 30  
Euro area countries intermediate a substantial share of global financial flows   
a) Global asset flows  b) Global liability flows   
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Sources: IMF BoP Statistics and own calculations.  0100200300400500600700
1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018EA
US
CHN (incl. HK)Other AE
Other EME
EU
05001000150020002500300035004000
1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018Euro area financial centres
Rest of  euro area
Other financial centres 
0102030405060708090100
2002 2006 2010 2014 2018Intra-EA
United StatesChina
Other AE
RoWExtra -EA
0102030405060708090100
2002 2006 2010 2014 2018United StatesChina
Other AE
RoWExtra -EAIntra-EA
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 60  
 Notes: Each area shows respective shares of total global asset and liability financial flows. Financial flows are the sum of FDI, portfolio 
and “other” flows. Intra- euro area flows are shown in shaded blue, while extra -euro area flows are shown in block bl ue. Data start in 
2005 for AUT and IRE. Data on FDI flows in 2021 are missing for CYP. “Other AE” includes the advanced economies AUS, CAN, JAP , 
KOR, NOR, CHE and UK. “Intra -EA” stands for intra -euro area; “Extra -EA” stands for extra- euro area; “RoW” stands for rest of the 
world.  
Chart 31  
The main counterparts for EU FDI are other advanced economies  
a) Main destinations of EU FDI  b) Main origins of EU FDI  
(percentages, average FDI stocks, 2015 -20) (percentages, average FDI stocks, 2015 -20) 
  
Source: Eurostat and own calculations.  
Notes: Each area shows shares of EU outward and inward FDI stocks respectively. “Other AE” includes the advanced economies 
AUS, CAN, JAP, KOR and NOR. “Asian EME” includes the emerging market economies IND, IDN, THS a nd MYS. “Latam” includes 
BRA, CHL, MEX, COL and PER . “Euromed” includes 15 southern Mediterranean, African and Middle Eastern countries which are part 
of the Euro -Mediterranean partnership with the EU.  
FDI exposures between the EU and its main partners are concentrated in the 
services and manufacturing sectors. In particular, the financial services sector 
attracts the largest volumes of both inward and outward FDI positions, along with a number of manufacturing sectors such as “petroleum, chemical, plastic and 
pharmaceutical” and “metal, machinery and transport equipment” (see Chart 32). 
The main origins of inward FDI in “financial services” are the United States and 
offshore centres, each accounting for 30% of the total. Overall, while the United States is the main source of FDI across most sectors, it has a particularly high share 
for the manufacturing of “computers and electronic products” (60%) and “metals, 
machinery and transport equipment” (45%) (see Chart 33).  
Moving beyond aggregate data and looking specifically at FDI through merger 
and acquisition (M&A) deals reveals a number of patterns.  A large part of foreign 
investment in Europe in 2020 originates in the United States and Canada (nearly 35% of M&A in the EU), followed by the United Kingdom (31% of total M&A). Investments are concentrated in the manufacturing sector (about 30% of the total 
number and value of investments), followed by information technology and financial 
services (15% and 10% respectively). Across all sectors, the United States is  the 
origin of the largest number and value of investments, followed by the United Kingdom and, after that, Switzerland (see Chart 34).  US
25.8
UK
20.7
CHE
10.8Offshore
11.8Other AEs
10.0CHN (incl. 
HK)
3.4RUS
3.0Euromed
2.1Asian_EME
1.6
Latam
6.5RoW
4.3
US
28.1
UK
17.9
CHE
9.6Offshore
24.2Other AEs
9.6CHN (incl.HK)
2.4Rusia
1.4Other  EME
1.9
RoW
4.8
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 61  
 Chart 32  
Inward and outward FDI positions, by sector of economic activity  
(percentage of EU GDP, average stocks, 2015-19) 
 
Sources: Eurostat and own calculations.  
Notes: Horizontal bars show the average volume of inward and outward FDI stocks in each sector, as a share of EU GDP.  
 
Chart 33  
EU inward FDI positions by sector of economic activity and partner country  
(percentages, average, 2015- 19) 
 
Sources: Eurostat and own calculations.  
Notes: Vertical bars show the average share of each partner country of total inward FDI stocks for each sector.  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40UtilitiesProfessional, scientific, technical serv.Trade, t ransportat ion, storageICTFinancial servicesOther manufacturingMetal, machinery, t ransport equipm.Computer, electronic, opticalPetroleum,  chemical,  pharma, plasticPrimaryOutward FDI
Inward FDI
020406080100
Agr icul ture Mi ning,
quarryingPetroleum,
chemicalMetal,
transport  eq.Computer,
electronicITC Construction Tou rism Financial
servicesTransport,
stor ageUnited States
United Kingdom
Switzerland
China (incl. HK)
RussiaOther advanced economies
Brasil+India
Offshore
Rest of the World
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 62  
 Chart 34  
Number and value of FDI deals in the EU by sector of economic  activity (2000 -21) 
a) Number of FDI deals  b) Value of FDI deals  
(units)  (bn euro)  
  
Source: BvD Zephyr.  
Note: A: agriculture, mining and quarrying; B: manufacturing; C: energy and utilities; D: construction; E: wholesale and retail trade; F: 
transport; G: IT and publishing; H: financial services; I: real estate; J: other services.  
One of the most noticeable trends is the large increase in extra- EU cross -
border M&A deals from BRICS countries. M&A deals from Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa (BRICS) investors have increased over the last 20 years, 
although they were starting from a low level (see Bencivelli et al., 2019). EMEs  
represented less than 20% of total M&A deals in 2021. China accounted for the lion’s 
share in terms of both the number and the value of completed deals (see Chart 35). 
Chinese investments are directed disproportionately towards manufacturing (about 50% of  deals in number terms), while all other sectors received less than 10% each. 
However, looking at the value of the operations, the distribution of Chinese investments appears to be more in line with that of other countries. Manufacturing received about 40%  of the total amount of resources, followed by energy (and other 
utilities) and transportation (18% and 12% respectively), broadly reflecting heightened interest in the infrastructure sectors and the large amount invested per transaction. The sharp reduction of Chinese outward investment after 2017 is largely 
attributable to the tightening of capital controls by the Beijing government. For its 
part, Russia accounted for a significant share of deals until 2014. However, Russian deals stalled between 2014 and 2015 following the sharp devaluation of the Russian rouble and the sanctions imposed by the EU due to the 2014 annexation of Crimea.  02, 0004, 0006, 0008, 00010,00012,000
A B C D E F G H I JOther
United States
Canada
Japan
United KingdomAustralia
Norway
Switzerland
China
0100200300400500600700800
A B C D E F G H I JOther
United States
Canada
Japan
United KingdomAustralia
Norway
Switzerland
China
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 63  
 Chart 35  
FDI acquisition in the EU originating in BRICS countries (2000- 21) 
a) Number of FDI deals  b) Value of FDI deals  
(units)  (EUR millions)  
  
Source: BvD Zephyr.  
A number of  elements blur the picture of the ultimate investor -destination 
linkages between EU members and their partners.  First, as we saw previously, 
around a quarter of FDI in the EU originates in offshore centres, while the six euro 
area investment hubs intermediate most of the inward and outward FDI flows (see 
Chart 36, panel a). Second, around 60% of EU inward FDI is intermediated by SPEs.
94 SPE activity in the EU is concentrated in a small number of countries, 
notably Cyprus, Luxembourg and Malta, whose inward FDI is almost entirely intermediated by domestic SPEs (see Chart 36, panel b). Third, Alcidi et al. (2021) estimate that in 2019 around 20% of non- SPE FDI flowing into the EU had an 
immediate investor resident in the EU but an ultimate investor non- resident in the 
EU, and that two- thirds of intra- EU investment originating in Luxemburg and the 
Netherlands was made by investors who were non- resident in these countries. Thus, 
when restated on an ultimate investor basis, FDI inflows from the United States almos t double, while FDI inflows from China are almost three times larger. While 
these estimates should be treated with caution, they provide an indication of the complex picture of cross -border ultimate investment ownership.  
 
94     SPEs are set up in countries with favourable regimes for a variety of reasons, but mainly for tax 
purposes, to move the risk out of parent compan ies’ balance sheet s or for reasons of confidentiality. 
These entities are part of complex chains of ownership usually spanning several countries.  050100150200250300
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021Brazil
China
IndiaRussia
South Africa
05, 00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,00040,000
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021Brazil
China
IndiaRussia
South Africa
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 64  
 Chart 36  
Most EU FDI is intermediated by investment hubs and channelled through SPEs   
a) Six euro area investment hubs 
intermediate most FDI flows  b) SPE -intermediated inward FDI positions  
(percentage of euro area GDP)  (percentage of inward FDI stocks, average 2015 -20) 
  
Sources: Eurostat and own calculations.  
Note: In panel a, liability flows are shown in shaded colours and with a negative sign for visualisation purposes. Negative ( positive) 
assets (liabilities) indicate disinvestments and the repatriation of profits. In panel b, vertical bars show the shares of SPE -intermediated 
and non -SPE intermediated inward FDI stocks respectively, over the period 2015 -20. 
The euro area´s portfolio and banking linkages are dominated by other 
advanced economies, although portfolio holdings of EME debt may be 
understated.  Reflecting the development of their capital markets and the global 
outreach of their financial institutions, other advanced economies (in particular the 
United States and the United Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, Japan and 
Switzerland) are the main investors in, and destinations of, euro area portfolio 
investment (see Chart 37, panel a). In particular, the United States is both the main 
investor in euro area portfolio instruments (holding almost half of euro area equity 
liabilities) and the country in whose securities euro area countries invest the most 
(accounting for about half of euro area equity and one- third of euro area debt 
assets). The United Kingdom is also a significant investor in euro area equity and debt securities  and is the issuer of around a quarter of euro area- held foreign debt 
securities. China (including Hong Kong) is an important investor in equity and debt 
instruments issued by the euro area, although it accounts for a smaller share of 
foreign equity and debt securities held by the euro area. Nevertheless, the actual 
magnitude of euro area portfolio exposures may be larger, as argued by Coppola et al. (2021), who restate global portfolio holdings from residency -based to nationality -
based. In particular, they  find that euro area holdings of Russian and Chinese debt 
triple when issuance via tax havens is accounted for. With regard to bank -
intermediated linkages (cross -border loans and deposits), the United Kingdom has a 
prominent position, accounting for around one- third of both asset and liability 
positions (see Chart 37, panel b).  -12-8-404812
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021Euro area investment hubs
Other euro area
020406080100
EU LUX CYP MLT NLD IRL BELSPE
non-SPE
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 65  
 Chart 37  
Main partners of euro area portfolio and bank -intermediated positions  
a) Euro area portfolio linkages  b) Euro area bank -intermediated linkages  
(percentage of euro area GDP , average 2015 -21) (percentage of euro area GDP, average 2015 -21) 
  
Sources: Eurostat, IMF Coordinated Portfolio Survey (CPIS) and own calculations.  
Notes: In panel a, vertical bars show the composition of euro area portfolio debt and equity asset and liability positions respectively, by 
partner country, as a share of euro area GDP. Liabilities to China, India and Brazil are estimated based on data from the CPIS and Eurostat. In panel b, vertical bars show the composition of bank loan, currency and deposit asset and liability positions respectively, by 
partner country, as a share of euro area GDP.  
Chinese FDI and lending for infrastructure in the EU and neighbouring 
countries have raised concerns for EU policymakers, given their potential 
geopolitical m otivations. As discussed above, FDI from China represents a 
relatively small share (around 3%) of FDI stock in the EU. However, the strategic 
aspect of some Chinese acquisitions in Europe and the opaque nature of Chinese 
overseas lending practices have raised a number of concerns.  
The first concern refers to the acquisition of stakes in a number of  strategic 
transport and energy infrastructure facilities across the EU as a part of China´s 
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). One prominent example of this is ports: China has 
stakes in 14 ports across the EU and handles about 10% of Europe's shipping container capacity.
95 On the one hand, estimates show that the reduction in 
transport times and trade costs brought about by the BRI could be very beneficial to the EU from a trade perspective and, in practice, the acquisitions have been accompanied by investments in port and road infrastructure.
96 On the other hand, 
given that the Chinese company (COSCO) involved in most of these ports is a state-owned enterprise, there are worries about undue political influence, as well as other 
 
95   See Giamello and Mardell  (2021).  
96   See Felbermayr et al.  (2020).  010203040506070
Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities
Port folio debt Port folio equityUS
UK
JAPCHE
CANCHN (incl.HK)
RUS
BRA+IND
Offshore
RoW
05101520253035404550
Assets Liabilities
Bank positionsUS
UK
CHE
CAN
JAPCHN (incl. HK)
RUS
BRA+IND
Offshore
RoW
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 66  
 strategic concerns.97 A number  of recent Chinese attempts to acquire ports in 
Europe have been blocked.  
The second concern refers to the risk of debt vulnerabilities for emerging and 
developing economies taking part in the BRI, including central and eastern 
European EU and EU -candidat e countries. On the one hand, Chinese investment 
in EMEs allows these countries to address their infrastructure gap and has been 
shown to have beneficial effects on economic growth.98 On the other hand, the 
literature has discussed the risk of hidden debt for these countries, given the opacity 
in terms of volumes and contractual clauses that characterises Chinese state- owned 
lending for infrastructure projects.99 Another concern is whether countries prefer to 
turn to China instead of the IMF when experienci ng financing difficulties. In that 
regard, Sundquist (2021) shows that China has been willing to provide funding, 
acting as an alternative to the IMF, only to countries able to repay it using methods other than cash (typically through exports of natural resources and geopolitical 
concessions). In the European context, there are concerns that the terms of BRI 
lending may be incompatible with EU regulations, particularly with regard to EU procurement rules. Several BRI infrastructure projects in the EU and western 
Balkans have been subject to EU investigation and have had to be shelved or 
modified as they did not comply with EU procurement and transparency rules.
100 
For their part, major advanced economies use aid provision and influence in 
international instit utions to support geopolitically important partners. 
Kuziemeko and Werker (2006) found that the United States increases aid 
significantly to countries which rotate into one of the United Nations Security Council seats and this effect is stronger during years in which key diplomatic events take 
place. Furthermore, countries are more likely to receive an IMF loan (and these 
loans are systematically larger and with less conditionality) if they vote with the 
United States and other G7 countries in the various U nited Nations Councils
101 or if 
they have a larger stock of G7 country FDI and bank assets .102 
2.5.2  Limits to investment finance in the EU  
The European banking sector remains partly segmented along national lines. 
In particular, the crisis management framework for small and medium -sized banks is 
less robust than it is for larger banks and there are still some prudential regulatory 
 
97    The case of the port of Piraeus illustrates the tension between (EU -asymmetric) economic benefits 
and strategic concerns. According to ob servers, after COSCO acquired 51% of the port of Piraeus in 
2016, the Greek government objected to the EU statement in 201 7 at the UN concerning human -
rights violations in China . Piraeus has become the busiest port in the Mediterranean and the 4th 
busiest in Europe (up from 17th place in 2017). Another recent case that created much debate was 
the acquisition by the Chinese firm COSCO of a stake in one terminal at the port of Hamburg. Due to serious concerns within the German Federal Government about the strategic implications of the 
acquisition, the German cabinet decided to reduce COSCO’s stake from the 35% originally 
envisag ed to 24.9%.  
98     See Mueller  (2023).  
99     See Horn et al . (2021), Gelpern et al.  (2021).  
100     See Think Tank European Parliament  (2018).  
101     See Barro and Lee  (2005), Dreher et al.  (2009) and Dreher and Jensen  (2007).  
102     See Oatley and Yackee  (2004), Presbitero and Zazzaro  (2012).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 67  
 barriers to a truly single European banking market. Cross -border integration has 
been progressing at a slow pace. In 2021, the amount of domestically held assets 
was more than four times the size of non- domestic euro area assets.103 This poses 
two problems. First, European banks have to compete with other global players that 
enjoy much deeper domestic markets (a larger domestic market is conducive to 
profitability). Euro area banks are less profitable than their US peers: their average return on equity between 2008 and 2020 stood at 2.1% compared with 7.5% for US 
banks. While the recent acceleration in the digitalisation of the EU banking system, 
together with further progress on non- performing loan workout, has helped to tackle 
some of the causes of lagging profitability, further cross -border integration may help 
close the existing profitability gap. Second, cross -border private risk sharing remains 
low and is exposing the euro area to asymmetric shocks. In turn, this puts further pressure on public budgets and impairs monetary policy transmission.  
Chart 38  
Domestic and non- domestic claims in the euro area (2015- 21) 
(EUR trillions)  
 
Source: Consolidated Banking Statistics and ECB calculations.  
Notes: Four -quarter moving average of total exposures for credit, counterparty credit and dilution risks and free deliveries.  
The EU bank -based financial system lacks an adequate complement in deeper 
and broader capital markets.  While t otal assets held by non- bank financial 
institutions in the euro area doubled between 2009 and 2021, European capital markets are still lagging behind other markets.
104 For example, the overall 
availability of risk capital in the EU is roughly ten times lower than it is the United States (0.044% of GDP versus 0.633% of GDP).
105 This lack of risk capita l relates to 
different types of financing instruments supporting different stages in the lifecycle of 
firms. In particular, there is scope for EU countries to develop their private equity 
markets into a more dynamic source of risk capital, which would give rise to better growth opportunities for young and innovative companies (see Chart 39). The EU 
specifically lacks large equity financing deals that start -ups typically need for them to 
move on from the early stages to the scale- up phase (growth capital).
106 Scale -up 
 
103    See Enria  (2022).  
104    Their total assets have increased from €25 trillion in 2009 to about €52 trillion in Q4 2021.  
105    See Demertzis et al. (2021).  
106    Gossé et al.  (2022).  02468101214161820
Q4 2020 Q4 2019 Q4 2018 Q4 2017 Q4 2016 Q4 2015 Q4 2014Euro area non-domestic claims
Euro area domestic claims
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 68  
 companies – when financed properly – contribute disproportionally to innovation, 
which is important from a strategic autonomy perspective.107 
Chart 39  
Business angel, venture capital and private equity (growth capital) across 
jurisdictions  
(EUR billions, left -hand scale; percentages, right -hand scale; annual data: 2016- 21) 
 
Sources: European Business Angel Network, Invest Europe, National Venture Capital Association, Pitchbook, FRED Economic Data,  
ECB and ECB calculations.  
Notes: The data cover all euro area countries and EU countries except Cyprus, Malta, Slovakia and Slovenia. “Business angel” 
investments include “angel” and “seed” financing. They are (high- risk) investments made by early -stage private investors, typically  in 
the form of seed financing for start -up businesses. Angel investments comprise both financial contributions and the time, expertise and 
connections the investors provide in exchange for ownership equity. Seed investment is funding for launch and is provided before the investee company has started mass production/distribution, the aim being to complete research or define and design the produc t, 
including market testing and creating prototypes. This funding is not used to start mass production/distribution. Venture capital is a subset of private equity and refers to equity investments made for early development (start -up) or expansion (later stage venture). 
“Start -up” is funding provided to companies once the product or service has been fully developed, in order to start mass 
production/distribution and cover initial marketing. Companies may be in the process of being set up or may have been in busi ness for 
a short time but are yet to sell their product commercially. The capital would be used mostly to cover capital expenditure and initial working capital. “Later stage venture” is financing provided for an operating company, which may or may not be profitable. This tends 
to be financing provided to companies already backed by venture capital. For further det ails see www.investeurope.eu/research/ . 
Firms are finding it difficult to fund the twin transition, which requires a major 
investment effort from both the public and the private sectors.  While the NGEU 
programme offers some support to the public sector, private investment has still to 
find its way (see Box 3.5). Despite the notable euro area financial surpluses at the aggregate level discussed in the previous subsection, European firms find it difficult, as Box 2.5 explains, to implement their relatively far -reaching investment plans, 
given the lack of funding.  
Euro area banks play a limited role in euro area capital market services.  
Although European banks are amongst the largest in the world, they face strong competition from abroad when it comes to the provision of essential services in EU 
capital markets. It is estimated that about 45% of the banks involved in non- financial 
corpor ations’ bond issuance activities in the euro area – as managers, co- managers, 
bookrunners, participants or underwriters – were foreign banks in 2021.
108 Similarly, 
48% of euro area initial public offering activities were carried out by non- euro area 
institutions. Strong reliance on foreign players in performing key services for capital 
markets exposes the euro area to a number of strategic autonomy risks. For 
 
107    European Central Bank  (2022a).  
108    According to Dialogic dat a for 2021.  00. 20. 40. 60. 811. 21. 41. 6
050100150200250300350
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Eur o ar ea EU 27 United K ingdom United S tat es ChinaBusiness angel
Venture capitalGrowth capital
Percentage of nominal GDP (right -hand scale )
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 69  
 example, non- EU-based banks may not be able to ensure financing if they face 
potential sanctions due to geopolitical concerns.  
Innovation in the European financial system relies heavily on non -EU 
companies. Recently, several non- EU fintech and big tech companies have entered 
the EU capital market and banking landscape. These new foreign- based players 
provide financial services in the EU mostly through payment licenses, but also 
through some banking and credit licenses. These companies could pose risks to the 
European financial system, as will be discussed in the next section. However, 
healthy market competition from abroad could also be a catalyst for innovation in the 
EU financial sector. Faced with the rise of fintech and big tech companies, European banks may be more inclined to innovate.  
2.5.3  Payments and financial market infrastructures  
This section disc usses dependencies on non -EU players in payments, 
financial market infrastructures and digital financial services, as well as cybersecurity risks, as shown in Chart 40.  
Chart 40  
Dependencies on non- EU players in payments, financial market infrastructures and 
digital financial services  
 
Source: Own elaboration.  
The dominant position of non- EU payment -related service providers in 
intermediating European payment transactions  has raised concerns over EU 
payment markets’ resilience, competitiveness and data privacy, as well as 
traceability in the fight against tax evasion, money laundering and terrorist 
financing. Non -European payment -related service providers  handle around 70% of 
European card payment transactions and show a high degree of market 
concentration in segments such as card transactions and online payments .109 While 
European cardholders can pay with one card all over Europe, the pan- European 
acceptance of cards issued under a national card scheme is reliant on co- badging 
with an international card scheme. In addition, European payment -related service 
 
109 European Central Bank  (2019)  

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 70  
 providers rely heavily on critical services providers (e.g. cloud services,110 
technology providers or mobile device manufacturers111), some of which are 
governed from outside the EU and whose interests may not necessarily coincide with 
those of European stakeholders. Given these strong non- European dependencies, it 
cannot be excluded that geopolitical tensions may negatively affect the functioning of 
the European payments ecosystem. For this reason, the upcoming Digital 
Operational Resilience Act will establish an oversight framework, comprising the 
European supervisory authorities, to oversee such providers, even if they reside 
outside the EU (contingent on certain conditions being met).  
The current overreli ance of EU market participants on third -country central 
clearing services, meaning that EU authorities have only limited reach during a 
crisis, is a potential source of financial stability risks.  In particular, the 
dependence of the EU financial system on services provided by UK -based central 
counterparties (CCPs) could be a source of vulnerability, especially during a crisis and the resolution of that crisis. Risks to the EU’s financial stability could arise from 
the size of the exposures of EU clearing members and clients to UK CCPs,
112 as 
well as from the interconnections between UK clearing services and a number of EU financial market infrastructures.   
Potential disruptions of clearing operations – as well as certain CCP risk 
management decisions – could affect the functioning of markets for financial 
instruments denominated in euro that are relevant for monetary policy 
implementation. For instance, UK centrally -cleared short -term interest rate 
derivatives denominated in euro play a fundamental role in the effective 
implementation of monetary policy.
113 Disruptions at a systemically important 
clearing service for financial instruments in euro could cause the propagation of liquidity risk to EU market participants and through the EU financial system.
114 This 
could lead to severe liquidity strains or disruptions at other CCP participants, which 
could in turn affect the smooth operation of payment systems in the EU, most notably large- value payment systems like TARGET2 for the euro (European 
Systemic Risk Board, 2021).  
 
110    A few large non -European cloud providers dominate the market in the EU, with the largest EU cloud 
service provider accounting for less than 1% of total revenues generated in the European market 
(European Commission , 2021d).  
111    The EU’s mobile devices market is dominated by a few Asian and US providers. EU suppliers 
currently have very limited market presence in the EU or globally (the EU’s global market share in communication electronics was only 5% in 2019) ( European Commission , 2021d).  
112    For instance, in 2020, out of all derivative transactions denominated in EU currencies cleared in UK 
and EU CCPs, 76% were cleared by two EU operators ( LCH Ltd and ICE Clear Europe Ltd) which 
were considered to be of systemic importance to the EU (ESMA, 2021). Moreover, in 2020 LCH Ltd 
cleared 97% of all euro -denominated forward rate agreements and interest rate swaps (European 
Systemic Risk Board, 2021). 
113    These derivatives measure market expectations of future interest rates and are a key instrument for      
determining the effectiveness of the transmission of monetary policy measures.  
114    In the event of a crisis, such as the default of a large mark et-maker carrying out interest rate 
derivative transactions denominated in euro or other EU currencies, the UK CCP would no longer 
receive payments from the defaulting clearing member, but would still have to make payments to the 
original counterparties of  the defaulting party. The CCPs’ urgent need to close their positions could 
result in a significant and rapid increase in their demand for liquidity in euro or other EU currencies, which might put great pressure on EU clearing members and their clients, as  well as on liquidity 
providers.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 71  
 Cybersecurity vulnerabilities are coming to the fore, as cyberspace is 
increasingly exploited for political and ideological purposes and the malicious 
targeting of critical infrastructure is a major global risk. Cyber risk has been 
identified by the ESRB as a potential source of systemic risk to the financial system. 
Interconnectedness across financial market infrastructures, financial entities and 
financial markets could lead to cyber incidents rapidly escalating from an operational 
failure to a liquidity and solvency crisis, with possible serious negative consequences 
for the real economy (European Systemic Risk Board, 2020). The ESRB has also 
highlighted the risk of a coordination failure between financial authorities at the EU 
level during the res ponse to a cyber incident. As such, the ESRB has identified the 
need for a future pan- European systemic cyber incident coordination framework 
(European Systemic Risk Board, 2022).  
The rapid increase in the involvement of non -European big tech companies in 
EU financial services entails operational and financial stability risks, 
competition concerns and consumer protection issues. Europe only accounts 
for 6.3% of total global tech market capitalisation, while the United States and China 
account for 70% and 18% respectively (Atomico and Slush, 2021). In fact, the 
combined market capitalisation of the ten biggest US tech companies is still ten times bigger than that of Europe. US and Chinese- based big tech companies are 
increasingly entering the realm of retail payments and financial services, including in 
Europe where they currently operate for the most part through partnerships with payment -related service providers and banks.
115 The growing presence of these 
new players could pose financial stability risks. For  instance, greater pressure on 
incumbents’ profitability may encourage traditional providers to take bigger risks (Financial Stability Board, 2019). It may also affect their solvency (Vučinić, 2020) or 
generate new types of interdependencies (European Bank ing Authority, 2019). The 
interconnection between financial markets and the many services that US and 
Chinese big techs provide may amplify financial stability risks
 (ESMA, 2020). Non-
European big tech solutions could also have an adverse impact on competi tion, 
potentially leading to a more concentrated EU payments market and winner -takes -all 
effects.116 Concentrated positions could also have a systemic impact on the EU’s 
payment system in the event of any operational failures or targeted cyberattacks. 
Consumer protection issues and potential data abuse are additional sources of 
concern arising from the activities of these big techs, given that US and Chinese big 
techs concentrate large quantities of customer data.  
The complexity of the crypto -ecosystem raises a number of concerns, 
including concentration risks due to few large crypto -asset service provid ers 
(e.g. exchanges) which are often located outside the EU, non -transparent 
linkages across the ecosystem with insufficient risk management, and the 
development of decentralised finance that could provide unregulated crypto 
 
115    In 2019, big techs made about 11% of their revenues from financial services. To date, big techs have 
followed a well -worn strategy of broadening their activities in finance. They often start with payments, 
in many case s overlaying such services on top of existing payment infrastructures. Increasingly, they 
have expanded beyond payments into the provision of credit, insurance, and savings and investment 
products, either directly or in cooperation with financial instituti ons as partners.  
116    These effects stem from the fact that big tech companies have payment solutions that benefit from 
pre-established customer bases, and which can harness network effects and deploy retention 
strategies that involve high switching costs for consumers.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 72  
 lending or borrowing services. The crypto market is characterised by high 
volatility, while its interconnectedness with European financial market players is 
increasing. Many of the crypto- asset issuers and service providers are located 
outside the EU and are still mostly unregulated. Th is poses various risks, including 
risks to the payment system and financial stability, as well as risks related to illicit business purposes. This is especially the case for unbacked, decentralised crypto-
assets, which are also the most volatile as they ar e not based on any inherent value. 
For their part, although it is claimed that stablecoins constitute stable crypto- assets, 
their underlying mechanisms are typically insufficient to ensure stability. The issuers of stablecoins are mostly located outside the EU and their products are offered 
globally. The perception of safety, combined with a lack of regulation, could generate 
concrete risks for the euro area, including risks to financial stability (e.g. in the event 
of a run), to the payment system and to c onsumers.  
2.5.4  The role of currencies117 
The international use of an issuer’s currency can lead to broader, cheaper and more easily accessible funding for the domestic economy, even in times of 
geopolitical stress.  For example, the literature on US dollar dominance emphasises 
the outsized role relative to trade patterns of the US currency in global markets.
118 
Among other areas, the dollar dominates in international funding markets, trade invoicing and settlement, as well as in foreign exchange reserves. The Unit ed States 
benefits from the large, strongly embedded base of transactions denominated in US 
dollars. As Maggiori et al. (2020) argue, one potential benefit that accrues to 
countries that issue an international currency like the US dollar is that “internati onal 
currencies effectively open up the capital account for firms that only borrow in 
domestic currency.”  
The extent of the international use of a currency depends on several factors, 
including geopolitics.  The literature identifies factors such as sound institutions, 
macroeconomic fundamentals (including price stability) and geopolitical 
considerations as determinants of international currency status. Research suggests 
that since the early nineteenth century the leading international currencies have 
been those of countries where, among other things, the rule of law is respected, creditors are well represented and there is an emphasis on political checks and 
balances, and which build durable international alliances ( Eichengreen, 2013). The 
literature also stresses that international reserve currencies are chosen on the basis 
of broad strategic and geopolitical considerations. One study has found, f or example, 
that military alliances boost the share of a currency in a partner’s foreign reserve 
holdings by about 30 percentage points.
119 All in all, in addition to economic and 
financial determinants, international currency status is also heavily influen ced by 
political and geopolitical factors.  
 
117    This section draws on Habib and Mehl  (2022)  
118    See, for example, Boz et al. (2020).  
119    Chiţu et al.  (2019) used data on the foreign  reserves of 19 countries pre -First World War. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 73  
 In turn, international currency status may reduce exposure to global 
(geopolitical) shocks.  Most notably, international currency status is a key factor 
which makes it possible to promote strategic financial (and economic) autonomy, 
thereby reducing vulnerabilities and exposures to external exogenous shocks. Even if not dominant, the broad international use of a currency across a range of 
dimensions
120 may be relevant to any discussion of the strategic autonomy of t he 
issuer, for a number of reasons. For example, greater use of a currency may allow 
broader access to international financial markets in times of geopolitical stress and 
diversified funding, both in terms of its source and its geographical origin.121 This 
leads to more secure – and possibly more abundant and cheaper – funding, even at 
times of domestic and global economic or geopolitical stress. Enhanced international currency status may thus also provide some protection against global (geopolitical) 
shocks .  
Other countries may also gain from using a currency that provides stability 
and protection.  Holding foreign reserves, and possibly also issuing foreign debt, in 
a dominant currency makes it easier to purchase essential goods and services 
offered in that  currency and provides a safe haven and store of value in times of 
trouble. Likewise, by gaining access to the deeper, more liquid financial markets of international currency issuers, and limiting foreign exchange risk for the lenders, foreign debt issuers  could benefit from cheaper funding costs. While the underlying 
logic is primarily economic, it may also bring geopolitical benefits as it encourages cooperative behaviour in times of geopolitical tension.  
Another channel of dependency based on the broad i nternational use of an 
issuer’s own currency is the invoicing of strategic materials and commodities. 
Purchasing such materials and commodities in an issuers’ own currency provides a 
degree of protection against exchange rate volatility, greater price transparency and 
room for manoeuvre should economic tensions arise.
122 It follows that avoiding the 
use of a dominant international currency could be costly, which provides an incentive 
to cooperate with the issuer.  
From an institutional and legal perspective, the international role of a currency 
may also make it easier to maintain or increase influence in global decision -
making . This may be the case, for example, in discussions and negotiations about 
international debt management and balance of payments, or in respect of 
participation in international financial fora such as the Bretton Woods institutions. As 
far as the legal dimension is concerned, the application of domestic law with de facto 
extraterritorial reach is another tool that could enhance strategic autonomy.123 These 
aspects broaden the definition of the “exorbitant privilege”, which relates primarily to 
 
120    See Chinn and Frankel (2007). These dimensions refer not only to a currency’s use in reserves but 
also more generally to its use as a vehicle for storing value and foreign investment, as an accounting 
unit and as a medium of international exchange.  
121    While the literature speaks of “global shocks”, geographically diversified financial flows and funding 
may imply that, at times of glo balised economic/financial stress, one foreign region may continue to 
supply capital to the domestic economy as another stops doing so, thus avoiding an (excessively) 
abrupt capital flow fall or even halt.  
122    See Goldberg and Tille (2009).  
123    The extraterritorial reach of US law has been discussed in the literature and the media (e.g. in the 
case of Iran). 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 74  
 financing costs which are lower, even under adverse economic conditions.124 At the 
same time, the exorbitant privilege may be countered by an “exorbitant duty”, 
resulting in a stronger exchange rate and global financial stability issues at times of 
global financial stress. All in all, the international status of currencies, whether 
dominant, reserve or widely used, has implications for the degree to whic h countries 
enjoy the advantages and disadvantages of such a status. The relevance of these 
considerations to the euro’s role in OSA is analysed in Section 3.3.3.  
2.6 Labour market and migration interdependencies  
Increasing flows of workers into the EU, demogr aphic trends and changes in 
labour participation patterns have transformed the supply of labour in the 
EU.125 Focusing on migration, over the past twenty years the number of non- EU 
immigrants and mobile EU citizens living in EU -27 Member States has increased by 
about 60%. The number rose from 34 million (6.9%)  of the EU’s total population in 
2000 to about 60 million (around two- thirds from non- EU countries) in 2019, 
accounting for 11.1%  of its population.   
The composition of the flows of immigrants entering the EU is also changing . 
While immigration has been primarily driven by economic motives, in the last few 
years Europe has experienced a major surge of refugees fleeing wars and conflicts 
in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and, more recently, Ukraine (see Chart 41) . The slowdown 
in internal and international migration caused by the pandemic reversed in 2021 and 
2022, and migration has been marked by even larger flows than before.126 
At the same time, EU labour markets have experienced profound transformations in their occupational and industrial structures, transforming 
labour demand.  A significant shift in employment from manufacturing to services 
has taken place alongside a process of labour market polarisation (upgrading), 
fuelling demand for  highly skilled workers at the expense of lower -skill groups. 
Employment shares are mostly increasing for occupations at the top and (less so) at the bottom of the skill distribution, with the share of middle- skilled jobs declining, 
leading to a noticeable polarisation/upgrading of the labour market in many 
European countries (see Chart 42). Globalisation and technology are the main 
drivers behind these trends. Technology is affecting polarisation through two channels: (i) a reduction of employment in routi ne manual and cognitive tasks, 
moving displaced workers to less -routine employment at the lower end of the skills 
distribution, and (ii) an increase in demand for workers in higher -skilled and (to a 
lesser extent) lower -skilled occupations, leading to grow th at the upper and lower 
 
124    See Gourinchas and Rey  (2007).  
125    In addition to rising immigration and intra -EU mobility, the fall in fertility, an ageing population and 
increasing female and older workers’ labour participation rates, accompanied by decreasing rates for 
male prime -age workers, have changed the size and composition of the EU labour force.  
126    See OECD  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 75  
 ends of the skill distribution.127 At the same time, rapid globalisation has moved 
many routine jobs to countries with lower labour costs.128 
Chart 41  
Net migration and asylum applicants in the EU  
(millions)  
 
Source: Eurostat.  
Note : Net migration data include a statistical adjustment for the total population.  
Chart 42  
Percentage point change in share of total employment, 2002- 18 
(percentage points)  
 
 
Source: Own elaboration based on the EU Labour Force Survey.  
Notes: High -skilled occupations include jobs classified under the ISCO -88 major groups 1, 2 and 3, namely legislators, senior officials 
and managers (group 1), professionals (group 2) and technicians and associate professionals (group 3). Middle- skilled oc cupations 
include jobs classified under the ISCO -88 major groups 4, 7 and 8, namely clerks (group 4), craft and related trades workers (group 7) 
and plant and machine operators and assemblers (group 8). Low -skilled occupations include jobs classified under  the ISCO -88 major 
groups 5 and 9, namely service workers and shop and market sales workers (group 5) and elementary occupations (group 9).  
 
At the aggregate level, migrant workers help to ensure a better match between 
supply and demand, thereby reducing labour shortages in the EU labour 
 
127    For a discussion of how technological transformations are shaping the European labour market see, 
for example, European Commission  (2018b).  
128    See Blinder  (2007) . 0. 00. 51. 01. 52. 02. 53. 0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020Netmigration
Asylum seekers
-25-20-15-10-50510152025
PL BG LV EE SK DK LT CZ SI FI DE HU NLEU27 RO SE CY BE HR IT ES AT EL PT UK FR IE LULow skill
Middle skill
High skill
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 76  
 market.129 In particular, the positive contribution made by migrant workers to 
matching supply and demand helps reduce labour shortages in both high and low -
skilled occupations (and sectors) that are subject to widespread shortages. New 
immigrants represent 15% of entries into strongly growing occupations. These 
include, notably, health- care and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics) occupations.130 At the same time, immigrants represent about a 
quarter of ent ries into the most strongly declining middle- skill occupations while 
almost half of the low -skilled (mostly routine) jobs are taken by immigrants in the EU 
(see Chart 43).131 In all these areas, immigrants are meeting labour needs by taking 
on jobs regarded by domestic workers as unattractive or lacking in career prospects. Besides, free movement of migrants in the EU adds adjustment capacity to labour 
markets.
132 More generally, labour mobility has helped to improve the allocation of 
labour resources and has  contributed significantly to labour -market flexibility within 
the EU.133 
Despite these benefits many challenges and untapped potential remain. First, 
despite its recent increase,  intra- EU mobility remains relatively low and below the 
levels of internal mobility in large countries like the United States, given the presence 
of big mobility barriers such as language.134 In this context, migration can play a role 
in reducing labour shortages in particular countries, regions, sectors or 
occupations.135 Second, from a potential growth perspective, the quality of the new 
entrants (in terms of skills and education) plays a crucial role in maintaining and 
improving the productivity of labour. The positive contribution made by high- skilled 
migration to growth is observed through different channels: increasing the stock and 
variety as well as the quality of human capital, raising the productivity of the 
economy, incentivising the adoption of new technologies and stimulating capital accumulation. In this regard, despite the rise in skilled migration to the EU, Europe is 
still struggling to recruit these immigrants and is lagging behind other regions when it 
comes to attracting top talent and skills (see Chart 44).
136 Moreover, the potential 
 
129    At the level of each Member State and among sending and receiving countries, there may be gains 
and losses from mobility depending on the longer -run dynamics of labour mobility, particularly with 
regard to the question of if and when mobile workers return to their home country. Such que stions 
are at the centre of debates regarding “brain drain” and “brain waste”. See, for example, Beine et al.  
(2008), Gërmenji and Milo  (2011), Albano  (2012), Biondo et al.  (2012), Hunter  (2013) and Böhme and 
Glaser  (2014). In the context of intra -EU mobility and third -country migration, it is also being 
increasingly recognised that return migration (“brain circulation” or “brain flow”) can contribute to 
skills transfer and innovation in both receiving and sending countries, underlining the complexity of 
the phenomenon of migration flows ( European Commission , 2018c).  
130    OECD/European Union  (2014).  
131    Fasani and Mazza  (2020).  
132     Estimates suggest that as much as a quarter of the asymmetric labour market shock –  namely that 
occurring at different times and with different intensities across countries – may have been absorbed 
by migration within a year ( Jauer et al. , 201 9). 
133    See for example, Arpaia et al.  (2016) and Kahanec  (2012).  
134    Bodewig and Ridao -Cano  (2018).  
135    For example, some studies suggest that migrants can improve the adjustment capacity of regional 
differences (see Guzi et al. , 2021).  
136    See Bossavie et al.  (2022) and Di Iasio and Wahba  (2021). Interestingly, recent evidence shows that 
skilled net migrat ion from the EU to the United States generates asymmetric effects. Between 2000 
and 2010 the share of patents filed by immigrants in the United States was around seven times 
higher than the share in the EU. However, this migration flow generated positive e ffects, both 
individually (as migrants increase their patenting activity by 42% after migration) and in the aggregate, as in the EU the benefits from spillovers to the EU co -authors of the emigrants increases 
their patenting by 15% (see Prato , 2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 77  
 contribution of migrants is currently low mainly for the higher -educated segment, 
resulting in over -qualification or lower employment rates for highly -educated 
international migrants.137 
Chart 43  
Overall employment in occupations and sectors over represented by non- EU 
workers (2021)  
a) Sectors  b) Occupations  
(percentage of overall employment)  (percentage of overall employment)  
  
Source: Eurostat.  
Chart 44  
Tertiary level of educational attainment by country of birth (2020)  
(percentage of population aged 25 -54 years)  
 
 
Source: Eurostat.  
Geopolitical shocks and public policies may exacerbate or ease these 
challenges. First, migration flows caused by geopolitical shocks, such as those from 
Syria, northern Africa and Ukraine,  expand the pool of low -skilled workers even more 
and make it more difficult to meet the rising demand for high- skill labour and 
 
137    See Stirling  (2015).  024681012
Accommod ation,
food service
activ .Administra tive,
 supp ort service
activ .Domestic
workCo ns tr uc tio nNon-EU citizens
EU citizens
0 5 10 15Cleaners
and helpersPersonal services workersPer sonal care w or kersBuilding and related trades
workers, excluding
electriciansLabourers in mining,
construction, m anufacturi ng
and transportFood preparation assist ant sAgricult ural, f orestry and
fishery labourersNon-EU citizens
EU citizens
01020304050607080
Greece
Italy
Slovenia
Cro at ia
Au str ia
Ger many
Spain
European Union
Belgium
Czechia
Finland
Port ugal
Den ma rk
France
Netherlands
Latvia
Cyprus
Sweden
Malta
Lithuania
Slovakia
Hungary
Est onia
Luxembourg
Poland
Ireland
RomaniaNon-EU born
Native -born
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 78  
 innovation.138 Moreover , policies restricting the mobility of labour across international 
borders, such as those in place during the COVID -19 pandemic, have an impact on 
the supply of high- skill labour or the availability of offshore skills.139 Second, policies 
fostering the transition towards a low -carbon economy are accelerating the process 
of de- routinisation and the demand for high- skill lab our. Primary industries, such as 
mining, and high- emission manufacturing industries are those most negatively 
affected by the transition. While new jobs are created as a result of the greening of 
the economy, these jobs are in different industries, often i n different regions, and 
frequently require different skillsets compared with the jobs that have been lost.140 
Well-designed policies focusing on better managing migration flows promote brain 
circulation, attract highly -skilled professionals and limit their  emigration, thus helping 
to address these challenges.141 
  
 
138    It also has complex shorter -term and longer -term budgetary implications, for example through the 
need to support and implement migrant integration policies, or through their impact on social security.  
139    See, for example, Bossavie et al.  (2022).  
140    On the other hand, (re)industrialisation and the reshoring of strategic activities can partially offset 
these trends, increasing the demand for routine middle -skill labour and, hence, making it easier to 
integrate migrants into the labour market.  
141    See for example, Eurofound  (2021) and Bossavie et al.  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 79  
 Box 2.1 The methodology used in the analysis of trade dependencies  
In Section 2 of the report  we analyse the trade dependencies of the EU and other global players 
from both an import and an export point of view, using a set of indicators based on the trade flows 
of goods and services.  
A first set of dependency indicators, employed at the aggregate level, is built using trade in value-added statistics, which makes it possible to take production and the complex structure of global interlinkages into account by using Inter -Country Input Output tables. Specifically, following the 
Borin and Mancini (2019) importer perspective to trace value added in a country’s imports, foreign dependency is measured as the share of directly and indirectly imported value added over directly and indirectly imported value added and domestic value added:  
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 _𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉
𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠=𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠
𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠+𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 
where 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 _𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 is the value added import dependency  of country i  in sector s, 𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 denotes 
the value added imported, directly or indirectly, by sector s in country i, and 𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠, domestic value 
added. Therefore, the index will be close to 1 when a country or a region relies mainly on foreign intermediates and final goods, without domestic production. By contrast, the index will be low when domestic production is much higher than foreign sourcing.  
A bilateral version of the same index can be used to gauge the bilateral dependency of sector s in 
country i  in respect of value added coming from country j: 
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 _𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠=𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠
𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠+𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 
where 𝐹𝐹𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐹𝐹𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠 is the value added imported, directly or indirectly, from country j by sector s  in 
country i . 
On the export side, foreign dependency is measured as the share of domestic value- added that is 
absorbed abroad over total domestic value added:  
𝑋𝑋𝑀𝑀
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀_𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠=𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠
𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 
where 𝑋𝑋𝑀𝑀 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 _𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 is the value added export dependency of country i in sector s ,𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 denotes the 
domestic value added produced by sector s in country i and absorbed abroad, and 𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 is the 
total domestic value added of sector s in country i.  
The bilateral dependency of sector s in country i from exports absorbed by country j can be computed as:  
𝑋𝑋
𝑀𝑀
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀_𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠=𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠
𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑖𝑖𝑠𝑠 
 
w
here 𝐷𝐷𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑠𝑠 is the value added produced by sector s in country i and absorbed by country j.  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 80  
  
A second set of indicators, used at a more disaggregated level, is computed using bilateral  gross 
trade flows. In particular, the analysis of dependencies in goods trade makes use of data from the 
“Base pour l’Analyse du Commerce International of the Centre d’études prospectives et 
d’informations internationals ” (BACI -CEPII) at the HS -6 level. T he analysis of dependencies in 
services trade relies instead on data from the Eurostat International Trade in Services database.  
At the disaggregated level, and in line with European Commission (2021d), we describe strategic 
import dependencies by computing three core dependency indicators  (CDIs ). First, for each product 
p we define import concentration using the Herfindahl -Hirschman Index (HHI):142 
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝=��𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝�2𝑁𝑁
𝑗𝑗=1 
where 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 is the share of country i imports of product p coming from country j in the total imports of 
product p  of country i. When the importing country is the EU, the index is constructed using only 
imports from extra- EU economies. The 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1 index ranges between 0 and 1, with highly 
concentrated imports resulting in a higher value of the indicator.143 Exporters’ shares 𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 are also 
used to identify the primary exporter of each product.  
Import concentration can also be measured at the country level through a weighted sum of the 
concentration indexes of all imported products, using their shares in total imports as weights.  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖=∑𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝∙𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 𝑃𝑃
𝑝𝑝=1
∑𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑃𝑃
𝑝𝑝=1 
where 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖 is the country -level import concentration of country i, 𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 denotes imports of country i 
of product p, while P indicates the total number of products imported.  
A bilateral version of the previous index makes it possible to gauge the bilateral concentration of 
country i  imports com ing from country j: 
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗=∑ 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚∙𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 𝑃𝑃_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑝𝑝_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚=1
∑𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝=1 
where p_max  denotes the products for which country j is the major exporter to country i, and P_max  
is their total number.  
A second index we can compute, considering the EU as an importer, is a scarcity indicator, which 
measures the unavailability of intra- EU production using the share of extra- EU imports of the total 
imports of a product:  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶2,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃=𝑀𝑀𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝
𝑀𝑀𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃+𝑀𝑀𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐼𝐼𝑁𝑁𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝  
 
142    In the case of services, p denotes sub -sectors.  
143    A 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1 equal to 1 represents a case of extreme concentration, namely a product that is imported 
from one trade partner only.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 81  
 where 𝑀𝑀𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 and 𝑀𝑀𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐼𝐼𝑁𝑁 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 denote EU imports coming, respectively, from extra- EU and EU 
countries. 𝐶𝐶
𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶2 also ranges between 0 and 1 with a higher value denoting a deeper scarcity of a 
certain product within the EU.144 
A third indicator measures the substitutability of imports  with domestic production, by proxying the 
latter with export flows:  
𝐶𝐶
𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶3,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝=𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝
𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 
where 𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 and 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 are, respectively, imports and exports of product p of country i . When the 
importing country is the EU, imports refer only to those imports coming from extra- EU sources, 
while exports include both intra and extra- EU flows. A higher value of 𝐶𝐶
𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶3 indicates a lower 
degree of substitutability, with a value higher than 1 denoting products whose imports from third 
countries would be impossible to fully substitute with domestic production.  
C
hart A provides a clarifying example of the use of the CDI indexes in the characterisation of import 
dependencies. According ly, following European Commission (2021d), the three CDI indicators can 
be used to identify the products of highest import dependency for the EU. Namely, the highest dependency products can be pinned down as those whose CDIs exceed the following thresholds, as defined in European Commission
 (2021d):  
𝐶𝐶
𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶1> 0.4  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷
𝐶𝐶2> 0.5  
𝐶𝐶
𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶3> 1 
 
Chart A  
Characteristics of import dependency at the product level  
Sources: Own elaboration with BACI -CEPII trade data at the level of HS -6 product groups.  
 
144    Given the lack of data on domestic trade flows at disaggregated level, the 𝐶𝐶 𝐷𝐷 𝐶𝐶2 index is not   
computed for other importing countries.   

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 82  
 Sources: own elaboration with BACI -CEPII trade data at the level of HS -6 product groups.  
Similar indicators can be used, still at the disaggregated level, to measure export dependencies. 
For each product p, we identify export concentration using an export -based version of the 
Herfindahl -Hirschman Index:  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝=��𝑠𝑠_𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝�2𝑁𝑁
𝑗𝑗=1 
where 𝑠𝑠_𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗𝑝𝑝 is the share of country i exports of product p destined to country j in the total exports 
of product p of country i. When the exporting country is the EU, the index is constructed using only 
exports destined for extra- EU economies . As its import -based equivalent, the 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1 indicator 
ranges between 0 and 1, with highly concentrated exports resulting in a higher value of the index. 
Importers’ shares 𝑠𝑠_𝐷𝐷𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗 are also used to identify the primary importer of each product.  
The c ountry -level export concentration can be measured through a weighted sum of the 
concentration indexes of all exported products, using their shares of  total exports as weights:  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1,𝑖𝑖=∑𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝∙𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 𝑃𝑃
𝑝𝑝=1
∑𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑃𝑃
𝑝𝑝=1 
where 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 denotes exports of country i of product p, while P indicates the total number of products 
exported.  
The bilateral concentration of exports  of country i destined to country j: 
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1,𝑖𝑖,𝑗𝑗=∑ 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1,𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚∙𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝 𝑃𝑃_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚
𝑝𝑝_𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚=1
∑𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑝𝑝𝑃𝑃𝑝𝑝=1 
where p_max  denotes the products for which country j is the major importer from country i, and 
P_max  is their total number.  
When considering the EU as an exporter, we can gauge the scarcity of internal demand through the 
share of extra- EU exports in the total exports of a product:  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋2,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃=𝑋𝑋𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝
𝑋𝑋𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑃𝑃+𝑋𝑋𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐼𝐼𝑁𝑁𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝  
where 𝑋𝑋𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 and 𝑋𝑋𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸,𝐼𝐼𝑁𝑁𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑝𝑝 denote EU exports destined, respectively, to extra- EU and EU 
countries. 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶2 also ranges between 0 and 1, with a higher value denoting higher demand scarcity 
of a certain product within the EU.145 
The indicators can be used to identify the products of hi ghest export dependency for the EU  as 
those whose CDIs exceed the following thresholds, as defined in European Commission (2021d):  
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋1>0.4 
𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋2>0.5 
 
145 As in the case of imports, the 𝐶𝐶𝐷𝐷𝐶𝐶_𝑋𝑋2 index is not computed for other exporting countries.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 83  
 Box 2.2  
The semiconductor global value chain and the EU’s position146 
Semiconductors  – tiny chips composed of miniaturised electronic circuits layered on thin (often 
silicon) wafers  – are the essential components that power virtually every digital or digitalised sect or 
of the economy, including means of payment (e.g. chip cards and payment terminals). Moreover, 
innovations in semiconductors form the backbone of the transformative digital technologies of the 
future, including artificial intelligence, 5G/6G, autonomous electric vehicles, cloud/quantum/ edge 
computing and the internet of things. For these reasons, all major economic blocs, including the 
United States, Europe, China and Japan are paying close attention to the semiconductor industry. 
Interest in semiconductors has increased further in the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, when a 
combination of shifts in consumer demand, chip factory closures, a faster than expected economic 
recovery and strategic stockpiling induced chip shortages that reverberated throughout the various supply chains, and particularly in the automotive sector (Hess and Kleinhans, 2021).  
The global semiconductor value chain is extensive, highly complex and geographically dispersed. Depending on the specific type of semiconductor product, the manufacturing process may involve several hundred steps, an ecosystem of several thousand suppliers and dozens of international 
border crossings (Varas et al., 2021). Chart A gives a highly stylised overview of the main steps in 
semiconductor value chains.
147 In basic terms, raw materials and chemicals are transformed into 
chip wafers using design software (electronic design automation), intellectual property and 
specialised semiconductor manufacturing equipment, most of which have their origins in 
fundamental research. The design stage and “front -end” manufacturing process is controlled either 
by vertically integrated firms (so- called integrated device manufacturers, IDMs) or by “fabless” chip 
designers that contract “foundries” or “fabs” for the actual production of chip wafers.148 The chips 
are then assembled, tested and packaged, usually through outsourcing to other firms, before being sent off to the semiconductors’ final consumers, who include electronic device producers and car manufacturers. 
The value chain’s configuration is marked by multiple cross -border dependencies and 
“chokepoints” . Because of far -reaching specialisation and high entry barriers in terms of knowhow 
and capital, several indispensable processes and inputs throughout the chain are controlled by just 
a handful of – or sometimes just a single – firm(s). This poses geopolitical risks, such as when 
countries in which the owners of such dominant firms reside use their position strategically to isolate 
others (Kleinhans and Lee, 2021). A case in point is the increasingly expanded set of export 
controls that the United States has imposed on Huawei, its affiliates and other Chinese digital 
technology companies since 2019, motivated by US national security concerns. These controls cut Chinese firms  off first from US -made semiconductors and electronic design automation software 
 
146    Parts of this box  draw heavily on Buysse and Essers  (2022).  
147    For much more detail see, for example, Baisakova and Kleinhans  (2020), Kleinhans and Lee  (2021) 
and Varas et al.  (2021).  
148    Increasingly, large end -users of semiconductors, such as Apple, Alibaba, Alphabet, Amazon, Huawei, 
Meta and Tesla are starting to design their own (application- specific) chips, using the fabless -plus-
foundry set -up.   
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 84  
 and then later from third- country chips and chip inputs that are designed/manufactured using US 
technology or equipment (Bown, 2020; Buysse and Essers, 2022).149 
Chart B provides the latest available breakdown of company turnover (for the year 2020) in the 
various parts of the semiconductor value chain according to the location of the “global ultimate 
owner” (i.e. the entity at the top of the corporate ownership structure)  (Ciani and Nardo, 2022). The 
chart demonstrates that different regions and countries occupy different segments of the chain.150 
By and large, the United States dominates in the upstream value chain segments that are most R&D intensive, most notably in fabl ess chip design (with companies such as Qualcomm, Broadcom 
and Nvidia) and among software and IP providers (e.g. Synopsis and Cadence, which are not shown as a separate category in Chart B). American IDMs (e.g. Intel, Micron and Texas Instruments) and also American equipment suppliers (e.g. Applied Materials, KLA and Lam 
Research) have large shares of global turnover in their respective fields. Japan is a key provider of wafer material, chemicals and gases (e.g. Shin- Etsu, Sumco and Sumitomo) as well as equipment 
(e.g. Tokyo Electron, Nikkon and Canon), and home to a few large IDMs (e.g. Toshiba and 
Renesas). Other Asian countries dominate in the downstream segments of the value chain. South 
Korean companies are leading players in the foundry segment, especi ally in the area of memory 
chips (e.g. Samsung and SK Hynix – IDMs which also work as foundry contractors for foreign chip 
designers). Taiwanese companies are dominant in the foundry business’ sub- segment of “leading-
edge” logic chips used for processors ( e.g. TSMC and UMC) and in advanced assembly, packaging 
and testing (e.g. ASE). China hosts several foreign- owned foundries, although Chinese companies 
themselves are most active in the (more labour -intensive) assembly, packaging and testing 
segment (e.g. J CET and Tongfu Microelectronics) and are increasingly active in the area of chip 
design (e.g. HiSilicon, Goodix and Omnivision).   
Europe’s current footprint is almost exclusively concentrated in the upstream part of the 
semiconductor value chain, where it  plays an important role in specific niches and in research. EU -
owned firms represent negligible shares of global turnover in fabless chip design, foundries, and 
assembly, packaging and testing. Conversely, the large European chemical industry provides a 
significant share of some of the high- purity materials that are used in chip production (e.g. BASF, Air 
Liquide and Siltronic). In addition, while EU -owned IDMs play a minor role in advanced logic and 
memory chip markets, they are significant in the “traili ng-edge” logic and discrete/analogue sub-
segments of chip design and manufacturing for automotive and industrial applications (e.g. Infineon, 
NXP, STMicroelectronics and Bosch). Also, the EU has a dominant position in particular types of 
manufacturing equi pment (e.g. ASML
151, Aixtron and Besi) (de Jong, 2020). Moreover, several 
leading research and technology institutes that have been involved in fundamental semiconductor 
innovations are based in the EU (e.g. IMEC, CEA -Leti and Fraunhofer -IAF). In line with these 
patterns, the EU is a net importer of the more advanced chips – primarily from Taiwan, South 
Korea, China (given the country’s role in the final stages of the chain) and the United States – and 
is a net exporter of chip manufacturing equipment – most ly to the same countries. Furthermore, a 
 
149    Likewise, as part of a longst anding foreign policy conflict, in 2019 Japan announced restrictions on 
the export of specific chemicals used in semiconductor manufacturing to South Korea. Even though, 
ultimately, Japan approved exports of some of the targeted chemicals, South Korea init iated a WTO 
dispute (Goodman et al. , 2019).  
150    Alternative estimatio ns of the breakdown in value-added by value chain segment and country (e.g. by 
Varas et al. , 2021 and Poitiers and Weil , 2021) show some significant variation in the percentages 
listed (likely due to differences in the firm -level sample, production stage delineation,  ownership 
definitions, the timing of data collection, etc.), although the overall picture remains similar.  
151    ASML has a monopoly of the extreme ultraviolet lithography machines that are used to produce the 
world’s most advanced chips.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 85  
 preliminary study of firm -level supply chain linkages suggests that, on average, nearly 80% of 
companies which supply European semiconductor firms are headquartered outside the EU, while 
companies with extra- EU owne rship account for more than 60% of the customers of these 
European firms (Ciani and Nardo, 2022).  
In February 2022, the European Commission (2022d ) proposed a Chips Act, which has  so far 
received a mixed reaction. The European Chips Act package revolves around three main pillars, to be financed with public and private funds of at least €43 billion up to 2030. The first pillar involves strengthening existing EU semiconductor research, design and manufacturing capacities, as well as 
developing skills training and reaching a better understanding of global semiconductor value chains. 
The second pillar offers support for “first -of-a-kind” (i.e. beyond the current EU state- of-the art) 
production facilities, in order to achieve the goal of producing at least 20% of the world’s cutting-
edge and most energy -efficient chips in the EU by 2030. Finally, the third pillar consists of systems 
for monitoring supply chain risks as well as for crisis response, with a toolbox including measures 
such as mandatory information gathering, the prioritisation of orders for critical sectors, common 
purchasing schemes and perhaps even export controls. Based on what we know about the global 
semiconductor value chain and Europe’s position in it, it will be very challenging to build (almost from scratch) frontier chip production in the EU and find sufficient demand for it (Kleinhans, 2021). It 
will probably be necessary to offer large subsidies and other incentives  to attract leading 
manufacturing firms from Taiwan, South Korea or the United States. Given that the other major 
blocs are also planning to invest heavily in frontier manufacturing, critics of the Chips Act suggest 
that the EU should focus its efforts on defending its current leadership in chips research and 
manufacturing equipment, as this would help it to retain its own strategic leverage in the value chain. Over the medium term, the EU could also venture further into high- value added, less capital -
intensive upstream activities (e.g. chips design and software) in areas where there is a good fit with the needs of European industry (Poitiers and Weil, 2021; Gross, 2022). Finally, cooperation with (several) partner countries will be inevitable if a steady supply of chips is to be secured. 
Protectionist instruments, such as export controls on placed on chip inputs, should be considered 
only as last -resort measures.  
Chart A  
Stylised overview of the main steps in semiconductor value chains  
 
Source: Author’s el aboration based on the literature (e.g. Baisakova and Kleinhans, 2020; Kleinhans and Lee, 2021; Varas et al., 2021).  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 86  
 Chart B  
Turnover for the year 2020 in different segments of the semiconductor value chain, broken down by 
location of the global ultimate owner of the company  
(percentage of global turnover in the value chain segment)  
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Ciani and Nardo  (2022).  
Notes: Original calculations are based on firm -level information obtained from Orbis, Bureau van Dijk and (for the largest companies) financial reports. The 
country sample consists of 886 firms with non -missing turnover data for 2020, out of a list of 1,084 firms  identified by the EU’s Joint Research Centre as 
operating in the semiconductor value chain. “Global ultimate owner” is defined as the individual or the entity at the top of the corporate ownership structure.  
Box 2.3 Food dependencies, food prices and the Common Agricultural Policy  
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)152 was among the first community -wide policies 
implemented under the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Community (EEC) in 
1957. It was also the policy that has, until recently, absorbed most of the EU’s annual budget, and 
still today employs a sizeable share of resources. The objectives of the CAP, set out in paragraph 1, Article 39 TFEU
153, are “(a) to increase agricultural productivity by promoting technical progress and 
by ensuring the rational development of agricultural production and the optimum utilisation of the factors of production, in particular labour; (b) thus to ensure a fair standard of living for the agricultural community, in particular by increasing the individual earnings of persons engaged in 
agriculture; (c) to stabilise markets; (d) to assure the availability of supplies; (e) to ensure that 
supplies reach consumers at reasonable prices.”
154 Some of these objectives focus on 
vulnerabilities and risks to prices and the supply of food products, which are prone to bouts of 
volati lity.155 It is worth noting that other economic areas  also support the domestic agricultural 
sector for strategic purposes.  
The CAP has been reformed several times since its inception. It has been criticised in the past156 
for distorting world markets by exerting downward pressure on agricultural commodity prices157. The 
initial CAP combined guaranteed minimum prices for producers, export subsidies and import tariffs. 
It has also been criticised for contributing to instability in world markets as a result of export 
 
152    For a summa ry, see Swinnen  (2016).  
153    See Article 33 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community.  
154    See Article 39 TFEU. 
155    Due to factors such as adverse meteorological conditions, natural disasters, military conflicts (as 
recently seen in the war in Ukraine) or the eff ects of climate change, among others.  
156    Mainly by other significant agricultural producer countries and also by international organisations.  
157    Thereby contributing to global poverty and food insecurity.   17
8
31
34
61
3
1434
33
27
1733
47
24
29
3
5
1116
4
8
8
1
39
44
4
8
18
6
284
1
3
14
39
370 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Chemicals and gases
Wafer material and soft ware providers
Manufacturing equipment
Integr ated device m anufacturers
Fabless chip design
Foundr ies
Assembly, packaging and t estingUnited States
EU27
Japan
South KoreaChina
Taiwan
Rest of world
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 87  
 subsidies and growing surplus stocks inside the EU.158 International pressure and increasing 
budgetary costs brought the introduction of reforms that replaced price support mechanisms with 
subsidies linked to production. Further reforms decoupled the link between subsidies and production, aiming instead to provide direct income support to farmers (see Chart A, panel a). 
Support has also been made conditional on environmental standards being met. The combined 
effect of reforms has been to reduce subsidies to production and trade, reducing their distortive effect on international markets, eliminating production surpluses to a large extent, increasing the 
alignment of food prices with international markets, and reducing the size of the CAP as a 
percentage of the total EU budget (see Chart A, panel b). However, this has also reduced the capacity of the EU to contribute to global food supply safety by increasing food exports in response to episodes of scarcity and price volatility.
159  
Chart A  
EU CAP Expenditures and CAP intervention prices  
a) EU CAP expenditures  b) EU CAP intervention prices  
(percentages)  (EUR per tonne)  
  
Source: European Commission.  
Notes: “Coupled direct payments” refers to compensatory payments to farmers linked to fixed areas, yields or number of animal s; “Decoupled direct 
payments” refers to compensatory payments not linked to a specific type of production but to the value of hist orical subsidy receipts; “Rural development” 
refers to funds directed at supporting farmers’ entrepreneurship, environmental undertakings etc.; “Greening” refers to payments to farmers who adopt or 
maintain farming practices that contribute to EU environmental and climate goals; “Other market support” refers to measures aimed at stabilising agricultural 
markets, preventing market crises from escalating, boosting demand and helping EU agricultural sectors to better adapt to market changes.  
Results are mixed with regard to how effective recent CAP reforms have been in meeting domestic 
objectives relevant to strategic autonomy (such as ensuring security of supply and stabilising prices of agricultural commodities) while streamlining budgetary costs in order to address efficiency 
concerns. Reform efforts aimed at decoupling aid to farmers from production to mitigate distortions 
(such as those arising from the accumulation of large surplus stocks) have not been fully effective in the presence of indirect coupling channels (land markets, risk, credit constraints, future 
expectations and labour markets)  which re- establish a partial linkage between direct income 
subsidies and production decisions.
160 Recent work focusing on the resilience of European 
 
158    See Swinnen  (2016), Chapter 18, footnote 4: “EU import tariffs and export subsidies varied to 
capture the difference between (fixed) domestic prices and (fluctuating) world market prices. This 
system of variable tariffs and subsidies ensured stable prices inside the EU, but intensified fluctuations outside the EU since export subsidies would be even higher when world market prices were lower.” Also see Swinnen  (2016), p. 271: “The high import tariffs and growing surplus stocks, 
which were exported with subsidies, caused global agricultural prices to decline.”  
159    See Swinnen  (2016), p. 271, Squicciarini and Swinnen  (2012), and Squicciarini et al.  (2011).  
160    See, for example, Boulanger et al.  (2017), who cover a review of relevant literature and assess 
potential coupling factors using a ge neral equilibrium approach.  0102030405060708090100
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020Export subsidies
Other market support
Coupled direct payments
Decoupled direct payments
Greening
Rural development
050100150200250
1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018Soft read US price
Germany wheat price
Intervention price
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 88  
 agriculture – specifically on the dimensions of robustness, adaptation and transformation – point to 
problems in ensuring supply safety .161 It has been shown that the effectiveness of decoupled 
payments and rural development payments (the main instruments in the current CAP ) are 
heterogeneous across regions and farm types. Decoupled payments have no significant or negative 
effects on farm robustness, while rural development payments enhance it, and both instruments 
have no significant effect on adaptation and transformation in most regions. These results suggest it would be a good idea to devise alternative policy instruments to support farm resilience. Lastly, 
recent analysis points to an increase in the exposure of EU farmers to higher international price 
volatility as a re sult of CAP reform.
162 Lower price support has a modest market impact but 
negative global welfare effects as it exposes risk -averse farmers to world price volatility, an issue 
that has not been solved by direct payments with negligible market and global wel fare impacts. It is 
suggested that unbiased futures markets could solve global welfare issues by making it possible to transfer price risks.                    
Chart B  
EU Food imports and food balance  
a) EU origin of food imports  b) EU food production, imports and exports  
(percentage of imports)  (millions of tons)  
  
Source: European Commission.  
A first approach to analysing the effects of the CAP is to observe the extent to which self -sufficiency 
in the EU is achieved by importing from abroad. Applying the same methodology as that used for CRMs (see Box 2.1) reveals that the EU is highly self -sufficient in dairy products, meat and 
vegetables, for which less than 20% of the value of imports produced by EU Member States comes 
from outside the EU (see Chart B, panel a). By contrast, more than 50% of the value of imports of 
coffee and fish and seafood comes from outside the EU. In order to calibrate self -sufficiency, we 
show the contribution of imports to the availability of some of the main groups of food in the EU. 
Chart B, panel (b) shows the role played by initial stock, imports, exports and production in the 
availability of food in the EU. Notably, the EU is a net exporter of cereals, the availability of which goes well beyond internal needs, explaining the relatively high level of exports. By contrast, the EU is highly dependent for fats and oils,  for which its production falls far short of its needs.  
 
161    See Slijper et al . (2022), who use FADN data to quantify the resilience of European farms.  
162    See Gohin and Zheng  (2020), who adopt a risk management perspective.  020406080100
Dairy
Meat
Vegetables
Sugar
Cocoa
Cereals
Fat s and oils
Fruits
Fish &  seafood
Coff eeExtra -EU
EU
-20020406080
Dairy Oil and
fatsMeat SugarDomestic production
Domestic consumption
Exports
Availability
Imports
Initial stock (2018)
-1000100200300400
Cereals
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 89  
 Another point worth considering is the role played by stocks of food commodities at times of market 
stress in the context of the CAP. Until very recently food stocks tended to offset price movements,  
so that when prices went up, stocks went down to supply the EU market with the food for which 
prices had increased, and when prices went down, stocks increased and a support cushion was 
built up (see Chart C, panels a and b). Recently, during the 2021- 22 season, this behaviour 
disappeared in cereals since stock levels, which are high, have not and will not be reduced, despite 
the increase in prices, according to the European Commission's summer forecasts.163 For cereals 
(see Chart C, panel c), the black line represents the relationship between prices and stocks up until 
the 2020- 21 season, while the red line, which includes the following two seasons (2021- 22 
estimated and 2022- 23 forecasted), has flattened, showing that the relationship has weakened. In 
the case of powdered skimmed milk (see Chart C, panel d), the relationship between prices and stocks still holds (the red line maintains its negative slope), as stocks have responded to the latest 
price hike. However, as the EU has consumed most of its stock, the ability of this powdered milk to 
continue offsetting further price increases has been diminished.  
Assessing the impact of food commodity prices on consumer prices is a complex task, given that 
this depends on how increases are transmitted throughout the value chain of the production and 
distribution of the goods and services that are part of the consumption basket. The impact is usually 
estimated using econometric models which make it possible to quantify the intensity and duration of 
the transmission of the shock. In the case of the EU, as mentioned above, it is necessary to use the internal prices of these food commodity prices in the analysis, which already incorporate the effect 
of the CAP. According to recent research, when the growth rate of food c ommodity prices 
temporarily increases by 10% in a specific month, there is an increase in the rate of general year -
on-year inflation in the euro area of about 0.3 percentage points after 12 months.
164 As Chart D 
shows, this increase occurs gradually, refl ecting the fact that producers along the value chain and 
retailers initially absorb, but then progressively pass on, the higher cost of raw materials to the final 
consumer. How does this compare with other countries? There is an extensive literature on the 
impact commodity prices have on inflation in the United States, including for food commodity prices, 
and these studies generally find, as do we, that commodity prices have minimal impact on 
inflation.165 However, Ciner (2011) claims that when accounting st atistically for frequency 
dependency using frequency domain methods, a long- term causality can be found between 
commodities and inflation.  
 
163    According to these forecasts, the availability of cereals in the 2022 -23 harvest season will be almost 
identical to tha t of the previous season and the surplus maintained (the sufficiency rate in cereals is 
112%) will be very similar to that of the previous decade (an average of 109% from 2011 -12 to 2020 -
21). 
164    See Borrallo et al.  (2022).  
165    See Jiménez -Rodríguez and Morales -Zumaquero  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 90  
 Chart C  
The response of food stocks to market tensions  
a) Cereals  b) Skimmed milk powder  
(EUR per ton, left-hand scale; million tons, right -hand scale)  (EUR per 100kg, left -hand scale; thousand tons, right -hand scale)  
  
 
c) Cereals: relationship between prices and stocks  
  
 
(y-axis: EUR per ton, x -axis: million tons)   
d) Skimmed milk powder: relationship between prices 
and stocks   
 
(y-axis: EUR per 100 kilos, x -axis: thousand tons)  
  
Source: European Commission.  
Notes: This chart shows that stocks of cereals and powdered skimmed milk have tended to move in the opposite direction that prices did in the past. However, 
more recently this behavior has changed. The black line shows the relationship between prices and stocks until the 2020- 21 season, whereas the red line 
(also including 2021 -22 estimated and 2022- 23 forecasted) has flattened for cereals, while still is maintained for powdered skimmed milk.  0
10
20
30
40
50
60 50100150200250300350
2000/2001
2001/2002
2002/2003
2003/2004
2004/2005
2005/2006
2006/2007
2007/2008
2008/2009
2009/2010
2010/2011
2011/2012
2012/2013
2013/2014
2014/2015
2015/2016
2016/2017
2017/2018
2018/2019
2019/2020
2020/2021
2021/2022e
2022/2023fEnding stocks (right axis)
Mid price
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500 150200250300350400
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022Emding stock (right axis)
Avg price
2021/2022e2022/2023f
y = -0.7756x + 208.92
R² = 0.0158
y = -2.092x + 248.82
R² = 0.2633
50100150200250300350
20 30 40 50 602021/2022e2022/2023f
y = -0.2389x + 274.89
R² = 0.3551
y = -0.1832x + 256.65
R² = 0.3445
150200250300350400
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 91  
 Chart D  
Euro area inflation response to a temporary ten percentage point shock in food commodity prices  
(y-axis: year -on-year increase; x -axis: months)  
Source: Own calculations based on data from the European Commission.  
Notes: This chart shows the aggregate impact on year -on-year inflation of a ten percentage point increase in agricultural commodity price growth for a range 
of foodstuffs (cereals, meat, dairy and eggs, fats and oils, sugar and coffee). Internal EU agricultural prices are used, except for sugar (as the sample starts in 
2006) and coffee, where international prices are used. The estimation period is from January 1997 to February 2022. The dotted lines represent the upper and 
lower bound of the 95% confidence band, which is calculated by weighting each food group’s confidence bands.  
 
Box 2.4  
The role of Chinese imports in Europe’s industry  
In recent years, China’s supply chains to major industrial regions have faced severe challenges. 
With the rapid spread of COVID -19 in China in early 2020, the authorities implemented strict 
containment measures, which disrupted global supply chains. Later in the pandemic the focus 
shifted as China restarted its production relatively fast, which likely supported the recovery in 
trading partners’ industries. More recently, strict containment measures in important industry hubs and ports in China have posed a stress to supply chains already strained by the Russian war in 
Ukraine. This box analyses the extent to which frictions in trade with China have affected 
manufacturing sectors in the EU during the COVID -19 pandemi c.  
The Chinese supply chain disruption in early 2020 had a significant impact on European manufacturing production. Khalil and Weber (2022) use a structural vector autoregression (SVAR) 
with sign restrictions (see Chart A, right table) to identify the effects of shocks to trade with China on 
euro area manufacturing output.
166 The identification strategy builds on the idea that Chinese 
supply chain shocks result in some degree of trade diversion, meaning that in the short run 
European firms can partially substitute Chinese imports with imports from other countries. The 
approach differentiates between supply -type shocks, which are associated with bottlenecks in the 
Chinese supply chain, and demand- type shocks. The latter represent shifts of euro area demand 
towards goods with a high input content sourced from China (such as, for example, consumer 
 
166    The variables in the SVAR are euro area manufacturing production, euro area real imports from 
China, euro area real manufacturing imports from the rest of the world, and Chinese manufacturing 
producer prices converted into  euros (all in growth rates). The sample period is January 2000 to June 
2022. The estimation uses Bayesian techniques imposing a Normal -Wishart prior on the parameter 
distributions and assuming three lags. Data sources are Eurostat (manufacturing productio n and 
manufacturing imports) and the National Bureau of Statistics of China (Chinese producer prices).   -0.10. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 6
123456789101112131415161718192021222324252627282930313233343536
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 92  
 electronics and some medical products) at the expense of imports from other trading partners. As 
they put strain on Chinese production, these shocks raise the prices of imports from China.  
A historical shock decomposition indicates that shocks to the Chinese supply chain lowered 
manufacturing production in the euro area by up to 7% in the spring of 2020 (see Chart A). Overall, 
however, the main contributions to the recession came from domestic sources.167 Whereas the 
impact of unexpected frictions in trade with China was sizable, it did not cause persistent damage to 
euro area manufacturing production. The effect of Chinese supply -side shocks quickly faded with 
the reopening of the Chinese economy. During the recovery, demand- type forces played a dominant 
role, strengthening the trade linkages of the two regions and raising the prices of imports from China.   
Industries with a higher dependency on Chinese imports were hit harder by Chinese containment 
measures.  Khalil and Weber (2022) illustrate this using a difference- in-difference approach. They 
construct a measure of import exposure to China based on the cost shares of inputs for 
manufacturing industries in the EU.  
𝐶𝐶𝐹𝐹𝑀𝑀𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜 𝐸𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑀𝑀𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐸𝐸𝑜𝑜𝑀𝑀 𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖= ∑𝑢𝑢𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑢𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖+𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖
𝑄𝑄𝑖𝑖+𝑖𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖𝑗𝑗𝑖𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖←𝐶𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖𝑚𝑚𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖←𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊. 
For each input good, j, the measure accounts for the overall cost of this good in production in 
industry i, 𝐸𝐸𝑠𝑠𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖𝑗𝑗, relative to the cost of all input goods, 𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖, plus the wages paid in this industry, 
𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑜𝐹𝐹𝑀𝑀𝑖𝑖. This ratio is weighted by the import share of intermediate input j in the total supply, i.e. the 
sum of domestic output 𝑄𝑄𝑗𝑗 and imports  𝑖𝑖𝐹𝐹𝑀𝑀𝑗𝑗. The last fraction captures, for each good, the share of 
Chinese imports relative to total imports.168 In the regression framework, an indicator variable for 
industries with a high exposure to imports from China, which is interacted with time dummies, 
captures the ti me-varying effect of the disruption of the Chinese supply chains.169  
At the trough of the pandemic recession in April 2020, production in EU manufacturing industries with above- median import exposure to China declined by around 25% more than it did in industries 
with below -median exposure (see Chart B). However, the effect was short -lived, reflecting the 
reopening of the Chinese economy and the subsequent recovery of Chinese exports. In 2022, the 
prospect of a prolonged Chinese zero- Covid policy with potent ially repeated supply chain 
disruptions might, however, leave a more lasting mark on European industries and encourage a 
search for alternative suppliers.  
 
167    The effects of Chinese supply chain disruptions discussed in this box are similar for US 
manufacturing industries (see Khalil and Weber, 2022). See  also Deutsche Bundesbank  (2021) for a 
related analysis.  
168    To construct the exposure measures, the authors use data fro m supply -and-use tables in the input -
output -tables by Eurostat as well as custom values for imports from China and the rest of the world in 
2019 following Eurostat’s classification of products by activity. The 70 NACE sectors are mainly 
three -digit, except  for the beverage (C11) and tobacco (C12) sectors, for which data are only 
available at the two -digit NACE level.  
169    More specifically, the panel regression specification, adopted from Flaaen and Pierce (2019), reads  
       yit=α+ βt1(Mt=t)D(Imports  Exposur e Chinai) + γt1(Mt=t)D(Import  Exposure  RoW )+
             + ρt1(Mt=t)D(Export  Exposure  Worldi)   +  θt1(Mt=t)D(Import  Substitutioni)+
             +  δi+δt  +εit,  
    where yit is a logarithmic time series of industry i’s production at time t, adjusted for a linear pre -
crisis trend. 1(Mt=t) is a vector of time dummies for each month in the sample from January 2019 
to June 2022. Imports  Exposure  Chinai is an industry -specific variable. Imports  Exposure  RoWi, 
Export  Exposure  Worldi, and Import  Substitutioni are control varia bles. δi  and δt are industry and 
time fixed effects. For each right -hand side variable, binary dummy variables, D(∙), are used to 
partition industries according to the median of the indicator. The coefficients βt measure the time -
varying effect of the Chines e supply chain disruption. The data are sourced from Eurostat.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 93  
 This episode cautions against an excessive dependency on one large supplier.  However, the sharp 
rebound of European industrial production and the quick closing of the gap between industries with 
more and those with fewer exposures to China indicate strong resilience of supply chains. Importantly, later in the pandemic when the Chinese economy reopened and other countries, 
including those in the EU, were in lockdown, European industries profited from their trade ties to 
China. Thus, this episode does not provide a cogent argument for reshoring. Instead, a diversification of supply chains could mitigate the effect of shocks stemming from one supplier, while also cushioning against domestic shocks.  
 
 
Chart A  
E
ffects of Chinese supply chain shocks on aggregate manufacturing production in the euro area  
Historical shock decomposition of euro area manufacturing pr oduction  
 (shock contributions, percentages)  
Sources: Eurostat, National Bureau of Statistics of China and own calculations.  
Notes: The chart shows a historical shock decomposition of euro area manufacturing production using a SVAR model estimated on monthly data from 
February 2000 to June 2022. “CHN trade friction” refers to Chinese supply chain shocks where “supply -type” indicates that an increase in trade frictions is 
associated with an increase in Chinese producer prices and “demand- type” indicates that an increase in trade frictions comes with a decline in Chinese -
produced goods. “Other” includes euro area demand and euro area supply shocks, and the deterministic component. The table shows the sign restrictions for 
the SVAR. The sign restrictions for  the effect of Chinese supply chain shocks on euro area production are imposed one month after the shock, implicitly 
assuming storage buffers and delays between imports of inputs and production. All other sign restrictions are effective in period zero of t he shock.   -35-30-25-20-15-10-50510
09/19 01/20 05/20 09/20 01/21 05/21 09/21 01/22 05/22CHN trade friction (demand -type)
OtherCHN trade friction (supply -type)
Euro area manufacturing production

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 94  
 Chart B  
Effects of Chinese containment measures in early 2020 on manufacturing sectors with high 
exposure to China 
(percentages)  
Source: Own calculations based on Eurostat data.  
Notes: The blue line shows the coefficients of a regression of the pre- crisis -adjusted production of a panel of euro area industries on a dummy for industries 
with an above -median exposure to Chinese imports that is interacted with time dummies. Dotted lines represent the 90% confidence interval. The panel 
includes 70 mostly three- digit NACE industries. The sample starts in January 2019 and ends in February 2022. As controls, the regression includes a dummy 
for industries with an above -median import exposure to the rest of the world interacted with time dummies, a dummy for industries with an above- median 
export exposure interacted with time- dummies, a dummy for industries whose imports are more easily substitutable with domestically produced goods, as well 
as time dummies and industry dummies.  
 
Box 2.5  
The challenges of innovation financing in the EU  
European firms experience specific constraints when seeking the funds they need – in particular 
funds for the purposes of innovation. Although the structure of financing varies considerably across EU countries , relying as it does largely on debt rather than equity, it is one reason why private 
investment is lagging behind when it comes to addressing future challenges. Equity financing, however, is more likely to buoy up innovative transformations. European commitments to the twin climate change and digital transitions are therefore aimed at strengthening and diversifying sources 
of financing, notably by encouraging intra- EU equity financing to ensure that the financing of 
innovation is more resilient.  
EU firms a re still only making limited investments in digitalisation and climate transition, mainly due 
to financial constraints. With regard to digitalisation and innovation, EU firms lag significantly behind the United States. According to the European Investment Bank Investment Survey (EIBIS), 64% of 
EU firms did not introduce any innovation in 2020, compared with 49% in the United States (see Chart A).
170 In the case of EU firms, any innovation appears to be more related to new processes 
within the firms, rather than a broader innovation capacity for the domestic or global economy (see Chart A).  
Compared with non- European firms, European entities face more constraints when seeking funds 
for their own long- term investments (see Table A). A Lack of available finance was a major obstacle 
 
170    EU firms also show less implementation of digital technologies inside firms . In 2019, only 62% of EU 
firms implemented digital technologies, compared with 74% in the United States, accordi ng to the 
EIBIS.   -40-30-20-1001020
01/2019 01/2020 01/2021 01/2022
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 95  
 for 20% of EU firms in 2019, compared with only 10% in the United Kingdom and 8% in the United 
States. The difference in co mparison with foreign firms is even higher among small firms, although it 
varies between EU Member States. Financial constraints are, for instance, twice as great for 
eastern European countries as they are for Germany or the Netherlands.171 
Long- term invest ment decisions are also concerned with adapting to the climate change transition. 
In 2019, a higher proportion of EU firms than US firms produced investment plans to tackle the 
impact of weather events and the reduction of emissions (45% compared with only  32% in the 
United States). However, the availability of finance to fund these plans appears to present a major 
challenge, as only 39% of EU firms faced no obstacles in financing investment plans aimed at 
tackling the energy transition, compared with 63% i n the United States. This level of financing 
constraint applies to all types of firm in the EU, whereas it only applies to SMEs in the United 
States. There is, therefore, a paradox between the number of EU firms which have investment 
plans as part of their  business strategy and the (high) number of EU firms which face constraints in 
implementing concrete investments due to lack of financing.  
Financial constraints faced by EU firms stem in part from the structure of financing in the EU, with 
its large reliance on debt rather than equity. In 2019, newly issued equity represented only 0.2% of 
EU firms’ external financing, compared with a figure of 2.3% for US firms and 0.7% for the United 
Kingdom.  
There is a disequilibrium in the use of bonds and equity issuance between larger and smaller EU 
firms, whereas the relationship is slightly more balanced for the United States and the United 
Kingdom. This indicates that SMEs have more limited access to financial markets in the EU.  Equity 
financing, which is structural ly more favourable to innovation than bank -based funding,172 is much 
more developed in the United States and the United Kingdom than it is in the euro area, representing up to 220% of US GDP compared with only 91% of euro area GDP in Q2 2021.
173 174 
At the same time, the growth of investment funds (and notably equity funds) in the euro area over 
the last few years has not benefited euro area firms, since two- thirds of these flows exited the euro 
area in the period 2019- 21. 
 
171    Dufouleur  et al.  (2020).  
172    See European Central Bank  (2022a).  
173    Euro area countries excluding Germany.  
174    See Hege et al.  (2008) and Revest and Sapio  (2012).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 96  
 Chart A  
Proportion of firms introducing products and processes new to the firm, country or world (2015- 20) 
a) European Union  b) South Korea  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
c) United Kingdom  d) United States  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Source: EIBIS.  
Table A  
Availability of finance as a major obstacle to long- term investment decisions in 2019  
(percentages)  
Sources: EIBIS.  
The euro area’s reliance on extra- euro financing was higher in 2021 than it was in the early 2000s 
(see Chart B, panel a). This is a trend shared with the United Kingdom (see Chart B, panel b). In 
this regard, while euro area equity financing has been rising, especially for non- financial 
corporations, the rise is dependent on non- euro area financing in net terms.175 The trend is even 
 
175    See European Central Bank  (2022a).  .010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020No innovation
New to the firm
New to the country
New to the world
01020304050607080
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020No innovation
New to the firm
New to the country
New to the world
01020304050607080
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020No innovation
New to the firm
New to the country
New to the world
01020304050607080
2018 2019 2020No innovation
New to the firm
New to the country
New to the world
 EU countries  United States  United Kingdom  South Korea  
Small firms  23 14 18 11 
Medium firms  20 4 8 7 
Large firms  17 8 8 6 
All firms  20 8 10 8 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 97  
 more marked for market segments such as start -ups, whose financing needs are met at a later 
stage of their growth by non- European funds rather than domestic ones.  
Chart B  
Proportion of euro area and UK stocks of equity and debt liabilities from the rest of the world 
a) Euro area  b) United Kingdom  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Source: Eurostat and author’s calculations.  
Note: Share of euro area and UK stocks of equity and debt liabilities held by the rest of the world of the total equity and debt stocks of the respective 
economies.  
Extra -euro area equity financing has originated mainly in the United States, which represented 40% 
of the stock of equity liabilities in the euro area’s international investment position in 2021 (see 
Chart C). Innovation needs equity -type financing (Brown et al., 2009) to thrive (Hall and Lerner, 
2009) and European firms are dependent on foreign investors for this type of investment. The question thus arises as to whether – and if so how – the euro area could use its financial surpluses 
to scale up domestic private investment to meet the needs of innov ation.  0102030405060
01-1999 01-2004 01-2009 01-2014 01-2019Debt
Equity
0102030405060
10-1998 10-2003 10-2008 10-2013 10-2018Debt
Equity
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 98  
 Chart C  
Euro area International Investment Position (IIP) – counterparts’ stocks of equity and debt liabilities  
a) United Kingdom  b) EU27 extra -euro area  
(percentages, stocks by the rest of the world)  (percentages, stocks by the rest of the world)  
  
c) Off shore financial centres  d) United States  
(percentages, stocks by the rest of the world)  (percentages, stocks by the rest of the world)  
  
Sources:  Eurostat and authors’ calculations.  
Notes: Share of different geographical counterparts (United Kingdom, EU27 extra- euro area, offshore financial centres, United States) out of total euro area 
stocks (IIP) of equity and debt liabilities. “Debt” refers to direct and portfolio investments in debt and other investments;  “Equity” refers to direct and portfolio 
investments in equity instruments.  
 0510152025303540
2008-01-01 2014-01-01 2020-01-01Debt
Equity
0510152025303540
2013-01-01 2016-01-01 2019-01-01 2022-01-01Debt
Equity
0510152025303540
2008-01-01 2014-01-01 2020-01-01Debt
Equity
0510152025303540
2008-01-01 2014-01-01 2020-01-01Debt
Equity
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 99  
 3 Policy options and trade -offs 
Following the empirical analysis background presented in Section 2, this 
section discusses the policy options for dealing with EU/EMU vulnerabilities 
and strategic dependencies, including those proposals put forward by EU 
authorities, and highlighting the trade -offs. Specifically, the EU is deploying 
measures to enhance its strategic autonomy in the area of industrial and trade policy 
– measures that need to be appropriately chosen and calibrated. These policies, 
such those aimed at increasing the resilience of GVCs, as well as establishing FDI 
screening mechanisms and financial sanctions, should seek to protect the EU’s 
status quo as an open economy and level playing field as much as possible, while at 
the same time minimising the costs of such policies. There may be trade- offs 
between these and other policy priorities, which may also induce (new) 
interdependencies or necessitate the prioritisation of c ertain issues. Although a large 
number of these policies do not fall within the ECB’s remit, they still have a direct or indirect impact on monetary policy. In addition, to attain a well -balanced OSA the EU 
and Member States need to act where appropriate. Member States can more easily 
pursue OSA -related policies if they reduce their vulnerabilities to external shocks 
arising from a more geopolitically -affected global order. Strengthening EMU and 
further advancing EU integration could contribute to this and to achieving some of 
the stated objectives of the EU’s OSA policies.  
3.1 Economic and financial trade -offs of current OSA 
policies  
3.1.1  General considerations  
EU industrial policy can be used as a tool to increase resilience and develop 
key technologies when market mechanisms fail to deliver.  An industrial policy 
should be dedicated to correcting market failures, developing key competitive 
advantages and increasing productivity. For example, market failures could arise 
under the presence of agglomeration effects ( or Marshallian externalities) when firms 
learn from the competitive environment surrounding them. When correctly 
accompanied by structural reforms, industrial policies can help the EU to enhance 
resilience. However, it is crucial that market mechanisms are not repealed, as this 
would induce efficiency costs.176 As discussed in previous sections, the rise in 
geopolitical tensions, the trade interruptions during the early phases of the 
pandemic, as well as the recent low growth dynamics and the need to acceler ate the 
 
176    See Rodríguez -Clare  (2007).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 100  
 digital and green transitions have sparked discussions on the role of industrial policy 
at the EU/EMU level.177  
The structural transformation of the European economy can be accelerated by 
reforms aimed at improving conditions for growth. A horizont al, rule- based 
industrial policy could enhance economies of scale and network effects.178 In 
addition, a policy that leads to the upgrading of human or physical capital could complement R&D subsidies.
179 Such a policy should also direct resources towards 
innovative and knowledge- intensive activities whose growth has been hampered by 
market fail ures180 or which have a “latent” competitive advantage, so that their 
development would continue beyond the duration of the specific policy.181 Examples 
of this include measures that promote the development of the IT sector.182 By 
contrast, an industrial poli cy implemented by targeted, steered government 
interventions (e.g. the direct promotion of individual sectors or enterprises) carries 
the risk of unintended side effects. This could lead, for example, to allocative 
inefficiencies, because such measures could undermine product market 
competition.183 Moreover, the measures could circumvent the preferences of firms 
and consumers.184 
The provision of European public goods, the smooth operation of the Single 
Market and the capacity to directly address market failures, could strengthen 
market conditions and tackle geopolitical risks, thus limiting the need to resort 
to OSA -specific policies. The set -up of the EU, with limitations to EU -common 
action imposed by the ultimate sovereignty in fiscal and economic policies of the 
Member States, may lead to the under -provision of important European public 
goods. When it comes to network and energy, the benefits of the interconnection 
between two critical nodes are spread to the rest of the network while the costs are 
borne by the countries in which the nodes are located. In this regard, EU actions 
could contribute to minimising overall costs and c ould maximise overall benefits 
through, for example, common financing or EU -wide regulation. An example of 
overcoming the pandemic and meeting challenges are the NGEU185 funds whose 
aim is to help Member States to promote digitalisation by investing in netw ork 
 
177    For the latest policy efforts see European Commision  (2020i).   
178    See Liu (2020).  
179    See Akcigit et al.  (2020).  
180    See Harrison and Rodríguez -Clare  (2010).  
181    See Itskhoki and Moll  (2019).  
182    See Manelici and Pantea  (2020).  
183    See Aghion et al.  (2015).  
184    See German Council of Economic Experts  (2019).  
185    The Recovery and Resilience Facility, which is set out in the EU’s medium-term financial framework 
(2021 -26) and  is specifically designed to support economic recovery following the COVID -19 
pandemic, also aims to strengthen resilience and adapt to green and digital change. It is a part of the 
NGEU package. To benefit from the support of the facility, Member States s ubmit their recovery and 
resilience plans to the European Commission. Each plan sets out the reforms and investments to be implemented by end- 2026. See European Commission  (2020j).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 101  
 infrastructure and digital skills (on the contribution of NGEU to OSA see Box 3.5).186 
Similarly, in the case of the green transition, the commitments implied by the net zero 
strategy require significant investments to be made from European funds. In 
addition, the recently established regulatory framework for business cooperation in 
the area of strategically important projects known as IPCEI (important projects of 
common European interest) shows that the provision of European public goods can 
also be fac ilitated through regulation.187 The latest developments in such trans -
national projects of European strategic interest (e.g. in microelectronics, batteries, hydrogen or the cloud) are notable examples.  
Another example of an area in which the provision of EU -wide public goods 
may be reinforced is foreign and security policy.
188 In this regard, the 
provision of military spending is currently almost entirely decided at the national level in the EU, despite a growing trend towards cooperation within the EU.  Any discussion of foreign and security policy in the EU needs to take into 
account the framework of (military) alliances, notably the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), to which 21 of the 27 EU Member States are signatories.
189 
Among other things, NATO s ecurity guarantees have for many years provided 
relative geopolitical stability and peace in Europe. They have made it possible for defence expenditure to fall as a share of GDP over the past few decades without, seemingly, undermining the EU’s external security (the “peace dividend”). From an 
EU point of view, while there is a certain degree of cooperation between Member 
States through the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), EU Member States remain f ully sovereign in 
military affairs.  
Recent geopolitical developments and, especially, the Russian invasion of Ukraine have led to unprecedented financial sanctions and may reverse the 
trend towards falling military expenditure in Member States. Together wi th 
broader developments in foreign policy, external security and defence, this 
may well have significant fiscal and economic implications for the EU and its Member States.  EU countries spend an average of 1.3% of GDP on their military 
capabilities through government consumption and investment. In some cases, 
military spending is also a driver of R&D and military equipment can be a notable export and/or import item. As such, the maintenance and development of military 
capability has a significant impact on t he economy, from weighing on public finances 
and generating public employment (which may imply macroeconomic stabilisation) to 
altering the terms of trade, with potentially significant implications for growth and 
 
186    The Maastricht Treaty has already set the EU the task of establishing and developing Trans -
European Networks in the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors. The networks are 
intended to contribute to the developme nt of the internal market and to strengthen economic and 
social cohesion, and link island regions, internal regions and peripheral regions with the central territories of the EU and connect EU territory with neighbouring third countries. See Article 194(1) (d) 
of the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union . 
187    The framework for IPCEI is intended to enable the promotion of transnational cooperation and the  
mapping of the value chain from applied research, development and innovation to the first -time 
industrial implementation and to key infrastructure projects in the environmental, energy and 
transport sectors which will be supported by state aid.  
188    Beyond economics, the concept of the strategic autonomy of the EU was initially developed with 
foreign and security considerations in mind.  
189    Two more EU Member States, Finland and Sweden, have recently applied to join NATO.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 102  
 inflation. While the level of military expenditure normally depends on external 
security considerations, the economic perspective may add an efficiency aspect. 
First, the provision of external security and defence at the national level in the EU 
could lead to fragmentation and inefficiency. Providi ng external security as a public 
good at the European level could result in economic efficiency gains for EU Member 
States, for example with regard to procurement, investment and public finances. 
Second, the composition of military expenditure is known to have a significant impact 
on spending efficiency, also from the point of view of military capability. The literature 
suggests that, as a minimum, military expenditure is economically more productive 
when it is directed less towards compensating personnel and intermediate consumption, and more towards capital investment and R&D (see Box 3.6).  
Model simulations show that the efforts made to accelerate the green and digital transitions need to go beyond an initial EU demand push and should 
aim to raise product ivity in the medium term.  A demand push in specific sectors 
could have heterogeneous effects on the economy (see Box 3.1). While the targeted 
sector and its suppliers may benefit, more downstream sectors (and countries) could lose out, as the increases in prices could undo the positive demand effects. 
However, an increase in productivity could have growth- enhancing effects in the 
majority of sectors and countries.  
In order to accommodate some measures, a relaxation of policies regarding state aid might be necessary, while making sure any unwarranted effects are 
avoided.  Throughout the COVID -19 crisis, EU Member States used different 
vehicles under the State Aid Temporary Framework to shield strategic firms and sectors from unwanted third- country takeovers, or to contain large- scale market 
access by foreign competitors and protect the domestic job market.
190 These 
instruments included direct capital participation and the granting of guarantees and subordinated loans. Most recent adjustments
191 to the relaxed st ate aid policies 
were accompanied by significant changes to the regulatory framework (i.e. stricter rules for emissions or for data processing and storing) which also took into consideration the significant investment needs of the twin transition to a green and 
digitalised economy , which could justify the prolongation of the temporary relaxation 
of state aid policies implemented during the COVID -19 crisis.
192 In any case, a 
careful review of state aid is needed to ensure that there are no unintended effects 
on productivity or modifications to the level playing field in the Single Market.193 
Although industrial policies are predominantly an internal matter, they also 
affect the external dimension of the Single Market . By keeping the Single Market 
open, competit ive and resilient to external shocks, the EU preserves its most 
important asset in multilateral negotiations. This is why the EU Commission lists most of these instruments as a tool to “unlock[ing] the benefits of the EU’s trade 
 
190    See Alonso et al.  (2021).  
191    The Commission had already amended the State Aid Temporary framework in November 2021 to 
support the economic recovery and, at the same time, the adjustment to digital and green transition . 
See European Commission  (2021a).  
192    The Commission announced that the State Aid Temporary Framework would be extended beyond 
end-June 2022, with a few minor exceptions.  
193    See Tunali and Fidrmuc  (2015).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 103  
 agreements, coupled with assertive enforcement of both its market access and 
sustainable development commitments”.194 In the Commission’s view, these 
measures are a critical element of OSA, given their potential to stem protectionist 
tendencies and counter the unwanted effects of globalisation. It is therefore not 
erroneous to assume that these instruments are also part of the trade policy toolbox, 
despite their capacity to act on internal markets.   
The Single Market ensures the competitiveness of EU industry, allows EU economies to cushion global shocks and increases market size as well as rule -
setting power in the international context. However, it also comes with drawbacks.  As explained in Box 3.2, subsidies can be trade- distortionary as they 
can have a negative effect on imports in comparison with domestic production. For 
this reason the case for adopting domestic measures should be carefully assessed. 
Adopting measures can be justified if they target specific inputs and raw materials, such as those needed for key technologies. Moreover, under specific circumstances 
the EU Commission can selectively limit market access to third -country 
enterprises.
195 
3.1.2  EU OSA industrial and trade policies to date  
The European Commission is putting together a toolbox with three different 
aims: preserving an international level playing field,  strengthening the 
resilience of internal markets and responding to geostrategic threats (see Chart 45).  
Chart 45  
Some key OSA initiatives undertaken by EU authorities  
 Instrument  Relevant text Potential pros  Potential cons  
Preserving an 
international level 
playing field  Foreign government 
subsidies  Proposal COM 223, 
5.5.2021  Correct distortions, 
tackle carbon leakage  Potential 
interventionism, protectionism  
Carbon border 
adjustment 
mechanism  
 
Digital Markets Act   Proposal COM 564, 
14.7.2021  
  
COM 842 final, 
15.12.2020  
EU industrial 
system for increasing resilience of internal markets  Strategic investment 
facility  Regulation (EU) 
2021/523, 26.3.2021  Reduce 
vulnerabilities, increase resilience  Heterogeneous 
shocks, fiscal cost  
Action Plan on 
Critical Raw 
Materials  Communication COM 
474, 3.9.2020  
Circular economy 
plan Communication COM 
98, 11.3.2020, European 
Commission (2020s)  
Strategic 
dependencies  Staff Working 
document 352, 5.5.2021  
 
194    European Commission  (2021b).  
195    According to Article 36 TFEU, market access can be limited in the case of derogations to the internal 
market freedoms. For more details see European Commission  (2021e).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 104  
 Protecting and 
strengthening the 
EU financial system  The European 
economic and financial system: fostering openness, 
strength and 
resilience  COM/2021/32 final  Prevent abuse of 
market power, lack of supervision/regulati
on and minimise 
financial stability 
risks  Economic 
inefficiency  
Response to 
geostrategic threats  FDI screening  Regulation (EU) 
2019/452, 19.3.2019  Prevent 
geostrategic conflicts and technology transfer  
 
Secure energy supplies at 
reasonable cost   Economic 
inefficiency, abide with global rules  
Anti-coercion 
measures  
 Energy emergency 
measures  Proposal COM 775, 
8.12.2021  
 
COM/2022/553 final  
  
Source: Own elaboration.  
With regard to instruments for strengthening the resilience of the internal 
market, these seek to assess the vulnerabilities in the supply chains and 
provide the European Commission with adequate tools to ensure that external 
supply shocks will not compromise the EU’s p roduction capacity.  The building 
block of this set of measures is the package on strategic interdependencies  that 
aims to measure and manage weak spots in EU strategic supply lines. The intention is to increase the EU’s economic resilience by applying (preferably) market solutions. More interventionist policies may lead to distortions and, in some cases, raise fiscal 
burdens. Through its Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials
196, the European 
Commission intends to work together with EU Member States and indus try 
representatives to develop measures which can strengthen the resilience of value chains, increase diversification and reduce the EU's import dependency on critical 
commodities. This includes the possibility of engaging in strategic partnerships with resource- rich countries such as Australia, Canada and Chile (e.g. through signing 
new trade agreements).  
Strategic action plans for CRMs are being put forward not only by the EU, but also by the United States and China.  The United States has also created st rategic 
action plans to deal with dependency in this area. The plans focus on supporting 
industry initiatives aimed at achieving more reliable sourcing, identifying recycling 
and domestic mining options, as well as outlining potential strategic partnerships and opportunities for cooperation. Most goals, however, are rather broad and general. 
This holds in particular for the EU plan, while the US plan proposes some more 
specific measures such as improving access to federal lands for mining. China, by contras t, has not published an explicit CRM strategic action plan. Nevertheless, the 
country is trying to secure its supply of critical global resources, including CRMs, with very concrete actions, especially in Africa. De La Bruyère and Picarsic (2020) investiga ted various instances of Chinese engagement in Africa and point out that it 
is often comprehensive, involving investment and loan schemes as well as government and private sector relationships. As an example, through strategic investment in cobalt mines China has secured the vast majority of production in the Congo, the world’s largest cobalt producer.  
The war in Ukraine has highlighted the importance of accelerating the green transition and eliminating the vulnerabilities caused by the EU’s dependence on R ussian energy commodities. The Network of Central Banks and 
 
196 European Commission  (2020k) 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 105  
 Supervisors  for Greening the Financial System scenarios provide an estimation of 
the impact of “net zero” strategies on overall energy dependence. Holding the import 
content of each energy source constant, the substitution of fossil fuels with clean 
energy would imply a reduction in the import content of energy consumption from 
55% to 40% in 2050 under current policies, although this will be reduced to less than 
10% if a net zero strategy is adopted in the EU (see Chart 46). However, current 
green policies imply not only a reduction in the import content but also a switch in 
energy providers. The “REPowerEU” plan is specifically designed to address that 
dependency. The EU intends to phase out Russian fuel imports well before 2030, 
starting with natural gas and coal in 2022, and partly substitute them with additional 
LNG imports from various third countries. At present, however, the expansion of LNG 
imports appears to be possible only to a limited ext ent as building up the – currently 
insufficient –  storage and transport capacity in the EU may take several years. 
Moreover, energy dependence at the national level would be reduced with if there were more interconnections between European countries. The E U has set a target 
for the interconnection of electricity (in terms of the total capacity of cross -border 
connections) of 15% by 2030. Although gas and electricity interconnections are well -
developed in central and eastern Member States, southern European countries are 
less well- connected. Furthermore, some countries, such as Italy and Spain, are in a 
better position to diversify their gas imports as they source gas from North Africa or 
have higher LNG capacities – this would increase the overall resilienc e of the 
system. A similar picture emerges for gas interconnections. The literature has shown 
that considering the gas and electricity markets jointly is crucial to understanding the 
dynamics of energy prices
197 and that a more interconnected system could m inimise 
the impact of demand peaks and supply shortages.  
Thus, having an EU -wide infrastructure network in place that would allow 
adequate energy to be redistributed to Member States would reduce the 
dependency on a single – or a few – suppliers (as recen tly experienced by 
some Member States). From an ECB point of view, this could ensure less overall 
and also less heterogeneous volatility in energy inflation between euro area Member 
States.  
 
197    Deane et al.  (2017).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 106  
 Chart 46  
Domestic production in the energy mix – historical and sc enarios  
(percentages)  
 
 
Sources: Eurostat and Network for Greening the Financial System.  
Tariff and non -tariff measures aimed at preserving the international level 
playing field focus on offsetting the competitive disadvantages EU enterprises 
might face arising from less stringent environmental or state aid policies in 
third countries. As foreign subsidies are not subject to the EU’s strict state aid 
control, any such support could give a beneficiary country an unjustified advantage 
in the acquisition of European firms, or when participating in public procurement 
procedures or in other economic  activities carried out in the EU. The European 
Commission has therefore proposed a Regulation on foreign subsidies distorting the 
internal market198. This regulation comprises tools for investigating concentrations 
and public procurements involving financial contributions made by non- EU 
governments. Although the Regulation helps to prevent unfair competition from third 
countries, it also increases the regulatory burden on companies, thus reducing the 
EU’s attractiveness as an investment destination and in international procurement processes. In the case of climate change, as the strict internal rules for carbon 
emissions in industrial processes can incentivise enterprises to relocate outside the 
EU (“carbon leakages”), the EU intends to impose import tariffs related to carbon content ( carbon border adjustment mechani sm
199). If approved in their current form, 
the tariffs would be applied gradually, starting with goods characterised by high carbon intensity, such as cement, steel, aluminium, fertilisers and electricity generation. Although the issue of carbon taxation and the carbon border adjustment 
mechanism may incentivise the development and scaling- up of climate- friendly 
technologies within the EU and the transfer of this knowledge to third countries, it 
could also increase the regulatory burden on market access and risks being seen as 
“green protectionism” by some trading partners, possibly spurring protectionist 
countermeasures (“trade retaliation”). Finally, digital markets are dominated by large platforms that act as “digital gatekeepers” by controlling key distribution channels. 
 
198  European Commission  (2021f)  
199  European Commission  (2021g)  0102030405060708090100
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Net zero
Current policies
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 107  
 These companies benefit from strong network effects in the digital environment, the 
intermediary role they play between provider and buyer and their ability to access a 
large amount of data, which, in turn, gives them a competitive advantage. Through 
the Digital Markets Act  the EU puts ex ante obligations and prohibitions on 
compani es already operating in the EU Single Market (see Box 3.3 on digital space) . 
Finally, the aim of a third bundle of measures is to reinforce the EU’s strategic global positioning.  While the EU is generally committed to open markets, European 
enterprises may  be crowded out in the domestic market by takeovers launched by 
foreign state- owned enterprises which may benefit from favourable financing 
conditions or another form of support from their national governments. The EU has 
therefore tightened its FDI rules in the area of critical infrastructure such as energy, 
health, media, telecommunications and transport, and in critical technologies such as 
data- driven businesses, robotics and artificial intelligence. The FDI screening 
mechanism , which entered into force in 2020, sets out minimum requirements for EU 
Member States’ FDI screening
200 and defines the criteria which may cause the 
Com mission to take action (see Section 3.1.3). With regard to Coercion (pressure by 
a third country on the EU or one of its Member States aimed at preventing the 
implementation of certain regulations),201 the EU has established a multistep 
procedure, starting with negotiations and arbitration between the EU and the third 
country involved and ending with countermeasures as a last resort.  
To sum up, the EU has, so far,  used various industrial policy tools and 
provides European public goods in the area, for example, of energy and digital 
infrastructure.  Promoting business cooperation in strategically important areas, 
fostering research projects and building up network capacities increases economies 
of scale. In the context of less stringent environmental and state aid policies in third 
countries, the regulatory changes discussed seem appropriate in the short term. However, with regard to these less strict regulations outs ide the EU, although the 
measures preserve the functioning of the Single Market they could reduce its attractiveness to investors from third countries. For this reason, the EU should step up its efforts to find multilateral solutions to international competition distortions. As 
the number of non- tariff barriers has increased significantly in WTO countries  
recently, a corresponding change in the multilateral framework would be useful in 
order to enhance competition and prosperity in the long term and contain the effects 
of climate change in the economy.  
3.1.3  FDI screening mechanism  
As Section 2 shows, the EU is one of the most open international investment 
areas and one of the main destinations f or FDI worldwide.  EU treaties 
acknowledge the importance of openness to foreign investors, as this can spur 
innovation and, as a consequence, competitiveness and job creation. The 
 
200    It is not mandatory to have a national FDI screening mechanism, although the European Commission 
encourages EU Member States to set up such a mechanis m.  
201    An example would be pressure applied by the US government (by increasing tariffs on certain French 
products) to prevent the French government from introducing a digital tax on big tech companies.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 108  
 relationship between FDI and economic activity is multifaceted and has been 
described extensively in the literature from both a micro and a macro perspective. 
Microeconomists have emphasised the effects, usually positive, on the recipient 
firms’ performance in terms of profitability,202 productivity,203 financial structure204 
and innovation.205 Frey and Goldbach (2021) find positive effects on the productivity 
of both the home and the host company. In aggregate terms, there is a positive correlation between FDI accumulation and GDP growth (see Chart 47), which is 
fairly stable across d ifferent levels of income. The transmission from firm adjustment 
to macroeconomic effects takes place through increased competition in the sectors 
targeted by foreign investors
206 and spillovers of technology and managerial skills.207 
Without questioning the  overall principle of openness, in specific 
circumstances FDI can pose a threat to national security or public order.  The 
concept of national security has changed significantly in Europe over the last three decades as new security threats and technologies have emerged. It is no longer only 
assets related to the defence industry that are seen as deserving of specific 
protection. As advanced technologies have become central to the operation and 
connectivity of the digital economy, threats have morphed from the traditional theft of 
industrial secrets to include cyberattacks and data breaches involving personal and 
industrial information. Thus, critical assets now include, for example, network infrastructure such as cables and data storing facilities. In addition, the diffusion of 
supply chains has introduced new vulnerabilities, especially when these include 
facilities located in countries in which disruptions are likely to occur.  
 
202    See Braguinsky et al.  (2015).  
203    See Bircan  (2019).  
204    See Bencivelli and Pisicoli  (2022).  
205    See Guadalupe et al.  (2012).  
206    See Barrios et al.  (2005).  
207    See Javorcik (2004).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 109  
 Chart 47  
Relationship between the variation in the stocks of inward FDI and the variation in 
real GDP over the period 2009- 19 
a) In emerging economies  b) In advanced economies  
(y-axis: cumulated real GDP growth; x -axis: change in inward FDI 
stock)  (y-axis: cumulated real GDP growth; x -axis: change in inward FDI 
stock)  
  
Sources: IMF and World Bank.  
Notes: Emerging economies are Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Burkina Faso, Bangladesh, Bosnia Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Georgia, Honduras, Haiti, Indonesia, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Republic of Laos, Morocco, Madagascar, Mexico, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Paraguay, Russia, Sudan, El Salvador, Serbia, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, South Afr ica and Zambia. 
Advanced economies are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Switzerland, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Greece, Hong Kong, Croatia, Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Italy, Japan, South Korea, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Sweden and the United States.  
After the GFC, numerous countries around the world adopted FDI screening 
regimes, thus reversing the global trend towards full openness that had begun after the Second World War. In addition, the acquisition of a significant number of 
major EU firms by non- EU buyers
208 sparked a debate on the need to provide the 
Single Market with an instrument that could protect national strategic assets from foreign takeovers. Such takeovers can embed risks related to the transfer of 
technology, data sensitivity and the control of critical infrastructures, all of which have 
the potential to hamper the security and competitiveness of the EU economy.  
Since 2019, the European Council has approved a common FDI screening mechanism to coordinate the actions of Member States, 18 of which have their 
own mechanism.  The EU Regulation
209 does not impose a single mechanism, but 
instead provides a common coordination framework to which Member States must 
adapt their respective process. It also mandates the exchange of information 
between governments and the European Commission regarding assets affecting 
European projects. The Regulation has an inter -governmental dispute resolution 
mechanism for those foreign investments destined for one Member State but with 
potential cross -border fallout affecting others. In order to assess the sensitivity of 
 
208    For example, the acquisition of the major German robot maker Kuka by the Chinese conglomerate 
Midea was extremely controversial, not only because of the amount of technology that was going to 
be transferred to a Chinese counterpart but also because of the industrial secrets about Kuka’s customers th at were about to be made available to a Chinese industrial actor.  
209    Regulation 2019/452 of the European Parliament and of the Council as updated on 23 December 
2021 .  y = 0.1064x + 42.079
R² = 0.2504
-20020406080100120140
-200 0 200 400 600y = 0.116x + 22.665
R² = 0.1252
-40-20020406080100
-100 -50 0 50 100 150 200 250
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 110  
 certain investments, the Regul ation allows Member States to consider, for example, 
the identity of the investor. It therefore allows governments to discriminate on the 
grounds of investors’ nationality, thus taking a geopolitical angle.  
The first annual report published by the European Commission in November 
2021 found the FDI Screening Regulation to be an efficient tool for protecting 
the interests of the EU while maintaining the EU as a top investment 
destination.  Members States reported the review of 1,793 dossiers in 2020, of 
which 20% underwent formal screening. Only 2% of the latter were finally prohibited 
-. The Member States notified 265 investments to the Commission – mostly by 
Germany, France, Spain, Italy and Austria. The three sectors with the highest 
number of transactions w ere manufacturing, ICT and wholesale and retail trade, the 
top four countries of origin being the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and 
the United Arab Emirates.210 
In 2020, the COVID -19 crisis prompted the European Commission and national 
governments to further tighten control of incoming FDI.  The crisis created 
supply fragilities, especially for pharmaceuticals and food. In addition, it strained the financial conditions of numerous EU firms, making them more vulnerable to foreign 
takeover. Energy and digital transitions combined with heightening geopolitical 
tensions (culminating with the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022) have 
increased the urgency of the issue.   
It is likely that the new EU mechanism will create a regulatory burden, especially for regulation requiring ex ante authorisation, as well as uncertainty 
over the investment process,
 which will affect FDI flows.211 212 Although to some 
extent this could reduce the attractiveness of EU Member States to foreign investors, 
other important partners, such as the United States213 and the United Kingdom214 
also have similar screening mechanisms. In the United States, the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 increased the investigative power 
of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. In the United Kingdom, 
the National S ecurity and Investment Act, which has been in force since 4 January 
2022, has established 17 sensitive subjects for which foreign investors require preliminary approval. Harmonising national regulations in the EU would be a step in 
the right direction when it comes to mitigating this effect.  
 
210    The Italian government blocked the takeover of two companies by Chinese counterparts: a seed 
producer by Syngenta and an intermediate goods manufacturer in the semiconductor industry by 
Shenzhen Investments Holdings.  
211    Efficient FDI scr eening requires a certain degree of flexibility to accommodate the emergence of new 
types of protection from takeover arising from technological advancement or geopolitical developments.  
212    Article 3 of the EU Regulation requires country members to adopt  transparent and nondiscriminatory 
procedures with specific time frames to temper these possible drawbacks.  
213    The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States may screen investments in critical 
technology, infrastructure and sensitive personal d ata business under certain conditions, according to 
a new regulation in 2020 implementing the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 
2018. Restrictions, notably those regarding “foreign adversaries”, were enhanced in 2021.  
214    In 2020 the Uni ted Kingdom set up a new agency, the Investment Security Unit, to take charge of a 
review of FDI. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 111  
 3.1.4  Payments and financial market infrastructure  
The dominant position of non- EU payment -related service providers in 
intermediating European payment transactions  raises several concerns.  In this 
context, one aim of the rec ent retail payment strategies put forward by the 
Eurosystem215 and the European Commission216 is to address challenges to 
the EU’s sovereignty in the payments market . Both strategies seek to reduce 
dependencies on non- EU payment -related service providers and foster a resilient EU 
ecosystem of payments by encouraging the development of a pan- European solution 
for payments, governed at the European level, that could achieve global acceptance 
in the long run. Further goals included in one or both of the retail payment strategies 
are: the reinforcement of the EU’s independence, efficiency, competitiveness and 
resilience in the field of payments by enhancing consumer protection and the safety 
of payment solutions; the full deployment of instant payments; the improv ement of 
cross- border payments between the EU and other jurisdictions; and active support 
for innovation and digitalisation. Among a number of private initiatives launched in order to meet the objectives of the retail payments strategy, a group of major euro 
area banks have established the European Payments Initiative. Their aim is to create 
a unified payment solution for European consumers and merchants alike.
217 
Secondly, the current overreliance of EU market participants on third -country 
central clearing services has prompted the European Commission to call for 
the building up of domestic clearing capacity. In the context of the adoption of a time- limited equivalence decision for UK CCPs, the European Commission has 
called for EU market participants to reduce their reliance on UK CCPs, in particular 
in respect of over -the-counter derivatives denominated in EU currencies.
218 In 
addition, the European Commission is currently drafting a number of proposals 
aimed at building up EU central clearing activities and strengthening the EU's 
supervisory framework for CCPs, including a stronger role for EU -level 
supervision.219 This would help ensure the continuity of the provision of critical 
financial services like clearing, shield EU market participants from financial stability 
risks propagating from third- country financial market infrastructures, and enhance 
the ability of EU authorities to intervene effectively during a crisis.  
Thirdly, the Eurosystem’s cyber resilience strategy for financial infrastructures 
has delivered concrete achievements that have strengthened the cyber 
resilience of the financial sector and, in particular, pan -European financial 
infrastructures.  In December 2020, the European Commission and the High 
Representative of the Union for Foreign Affair s and Security Policy presented the 
new EU Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital Decade, aimed at reinforcing the EU’s 
resilience against cyber threats and ensuring that digital services and tools are 
trustworthy and reliable (JOIN, 2020). The new strategy proposes, among other 
 
215    European Central Bank  (2021b).   
216    European Commission  (2020l).  
217    See Panetta (2022a).  
218    See European Commission (2020m).  
219    A package of legislative measures and the extension of the equivalence decision for UK CCPs to 
June 2025 were first announced on 10 November 2021 ( see European Commission , 2021h).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 112  
 things, a review of the EU Network and Information Security Directive (NIS 
Directive)220 and new measures aimed at strengthening the EU Cyber Diplomacy 
Toolbox221. The goal of the Directive is to enhance cybersecurity across the EU. 
Furthermore, with a focus on the financial system222, in September 2020 the 
European Commission published a proposal for a regulation on digital operational 
resilience in the EU’s financial services sector (DORA Regulation)223 as part of its 
Digital Finance P ackage. The proposal covers a range of financial entities regulated 
at the EU level, including financial market infrastructures such as central securities 
depositories and CCPs, while payments systems and schemes fall under the 
oversight of the ECB. The Regulation lays down uniform requirements concerning 
the security of network and information systems supporting the business processes of financial entities needed to achieve a high common level of digital operational 
resilience (as well as critical third pa rties which provide ICT -related services to them, 
such as cloud platforms or data analytics services). Beyond the regulatory aspect 
and the fact that cyber risk is cross -border by nature, several coordination structures 
have been set up at the European lev el to bring together public and/or private 
entities.
224 These bodies make it possible to share information on cyber threats and 
cyber incidents in normal times as well as in times of crisis, and to practice managing large- scale crises through crisis simulat ion exercises.  
Fourthly, the EU is taking steps to prevent abuses stemming from the growing 
political, social and economic power of big tech companies in the digital 
sector.  In May 2018, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) entered into 
force, imposing obligations on businesses regarding the collection and processing of 
EU residents’ personal information. To further strengthen the rules governing the 
EU’s digital space, in December 2020 the European Commission presented a digital services package
 comprising a number of regulatory and supervisory initiatives 
including the Digital Markets Act (DM A)225 and the Digital Services Act (DS A)226. The 
DMA is one of the first initiatives to globally regulate the market power of large digital 
 
220    The revised NIS Directive broadens its scope, reinforces its security and incident reporting 
requirements and strengthens national  supervision and enforcement. It also includes proposals for 
cooperation and information sharing on cyber crisis management ( Proposal for a Directive of the 
European  Parliament and of the Council on measures for a high common level of cybersecurity 
across the Union, repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148  [‘NIS Directive’], COM(2020) 823).  
221    The Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox was endorsed by the EU Foreign Affairs Council in 2017 and contains 
the main principles for a joint diplomatic response to cybercrime. The toolbox consists of several 
measures aimed at reinforcing prevention and cooperation in the face of malicious cyber activities, 
including a cyber sanctions regime. The new EU Cybersecurity Strategy proposes looking into 
additional measures under the Cyber Diplomacy Toolbox, including the possibility of introducing new 
restrictive measures and exploring qualified majority voting for listings under the horizontal sanctions  
regime in place against cyberattacks. It also suggests strengthening cooperation with international 
partners, updating the implementing guidelines of the toolbox and integrating the toolbox into EU 
crisis mechanisms.  
222    Currently, there is no one single major European cybersecurity norm for the financial system as a 
whole. Instead, there are multiple European and national regulations and standards that apply to 
different sub -sectors and in different contexts.   
223    Proposal for a Regulation of the Europe an Parliament and of the Council on digital operational 
resilience for the financial sector (DORA) and amending Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014 and (EU) No 909/2014.  
224    For example, in 2020 the European Cyber Resilienc e Board (ECRB), coordinated by the ECB, set up 
a platform called CIISI -EU, bringing together market infrastructures and central banks with the aim of 
sharing information on cyber incidents and threats.  
225    See European Commission  (2020d ). 
226    See European Commission  (2020c).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 113  
 companies. This regulation seeks to reinforce European authorities’ powers to 
prevent anticompetitive behaviour from certain large companies which provide core 
platform services (“gatekeepers”), banning certain practices and imposing sanctions 
for non- compliant behaviour. As for the DSA, it regulates how digital platforms handle 
illegal products, services and content (including disinformation campaigns, 
incitement to terrorism and the sale of illegal goods). The DMA and DSA Regulations 
were adopted in October 2022 and will ent er into force in 2023.227  
With regard to digital forms of money, the discussion surrounding central bank 
digital currencies (CBDCs) in general and the digital euro in particular 
continues, as does the debate over crypto -assets and stablecoins. In the 
conte xt of a fast- changing payments landscape, the issuance of a digital euro 
could preserve the role of public money as the anchor of the payments system, fostering innovation in Europe and strategic autonomy in the EU.  As 
part of the Digital Finance Package, in 2020 the European Commission introduced a 
proposal to introduce the Markets in Crypto- Assets (MiCA) Regulation,
228 which will 
seek to mitigate the risks posed by crypto- assets, while supporting innovation. MiCA 
transforms the issuance of these assets and related services into reserved activities 
and its aim is to mitigate the impact of stablecoins on sovereignty, monetary policy, 
financial stability and the smooth functioning of the payment system. The Regulation is expected to enter into force in 2024. In addition, in November 2021 the ECB 
implemented its new oversight framework for payment instruments, schemes and arrangements (the PISA framework), which extended oversight to electronic wallets and digital payment  tokens (such as stablecoins).  
Against this background, the Governing Council of the ECB established a high- level 
task force in January 2020 to make further progress on CBDCs in the euro area. The digital euro investigation phase is underway in a scenario in which it is essential to 
ensure that citizens continue to have access to central bank money as they shift 
increasingly to digital payment. A strong public money anchor is vitally important in 
order to protect the “singleness” of money, monetary soverei gnty and the integrity of 
the financial system. In addition, with the development of new means of payment, 
foreign digital solutions could displace existing payment solutions in Europe. This 
risk would be increased by the expansion of means of payment offered by big techs, 
with their large customer bases. This could have implications for the EU’s autonomy 
and privacy with regard to payments and could endanger European sovereignty. 
Moreover, some economies might develop CBDCs that could enhance the role of 
other international currencies to the detriment of the euro. If this future scenario were 
to materialise, issuing a digital euro would also contribute to protecting the strategic 
autonomy of European payments and monetary sovereignty, ensuring that payments  
in the EU meet the highest standards and providing a fall -back solution if geopolitical 
tensions intensified ( Panetta, 2022b).  Furthermore, issuing a digital euro could 
actively promote innovation by stimulating the supply of new payment services and 
functionalities and create business opportunities, thus complementing private 
solutions. To ensure the potential benefits of the digital euro are maximised and t o 
 
227    Regulation (EU) 2022/1925 (Digital Markets Act) ; and Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 (Digital Services 
Act). 
228    European Commission  (2020n).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 114  
 manage any risks it might generate, adequate design is of critical importance. The 
potential impact of a digital euro on monetary policy transmission and financial 
stability should also be carefully evaluated. It is essential that the digital euro does 
not crowd out private means of payment and that it achieves the highest standards 
of privacy, accessibility, robustness, safety and efficiency ( European Centr al Bank , 
2020).  
3.2 Trade and financial sources of shocks and OSA  
3.2.1  Global value chains and trade  
Global value chains (GVCs) — the organisation of production activities by 
locating different stages of a production process in different countries — are 
exposed to  global, common EU (geopolitical) shocks. During the COVID -19 
pandemic they generally seem to have shown resilience. The pandemic saw a 
sharp contraction of trade flows and GVC -related trade, followed by a fast recovery. 
This aggregate trend, however, mask ed substantial heterogeneity. International trade 
in services – and travel services in particular – collapsed in the first two quarters of 
2020 as a result of containment measures and local lockdowns and have remained 
sluggish. By contrast, goods trade rebounded much more rapidly after its initial 
decline229 as companies became more experienced in operating under mobility 
restrictions.230 Firms operating in sectors which are more engaged in GVC activities 
performed better than others during the recovery phase after two major global 
shocks, namely the 2008 GFC and the COVID -19 pandemic. In both episodes the 
effect of GVC participation on sectoral revenue growth was similar in magnitude (see 
Chart 48, panel a). GVCs did not, therefore, collapse, but instead cont ributed to the 
sharp rebound in global activity and trade (see Chart 48, panel b).  
Nonetheless, some industries can be significantly affected. Notwithstanding 
GVCs’ broad- based resilience during the pandemic, some (strategic) industries 
marked by particularly complex and geographically dispersed supply chains – such 
as semiconductors (see Box 2.2) or, more downstream, the automotive sector231 – 
did face longer -lasting disruptions as a result of multiple, compounding shocks. From 
March 2022 onwards, the renewed lockdown of some of China’s major 
manufacturing areas and ports once again intensified pressures on GVCs, as evidenced by increased port congestion, shipping costs and delivery times. During the same period, additional trade- related disruptions  were triggered by the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine and the associated sanctions and corporate actions. While the energy shock is expected to propagate downstream in the EU supply chain, with 
 
229    See Arriola et al.  (2021).  
230    See Berthou and Stumpner  (2022), Espitia et al.  (2022). Trade in specific GVC -intensive industries 
such as the automotive, electronics, textiles and medical goods industries was characterised by a 
larger initial drop early in the pandemic, but also by a quicker recovery than was seen for trade in 
non-GVC -intensive industries (IMF , 2022). For the effects of the Chinese lockdown on supply chains 
early in the pandemic, see Box 2.4.  
231    See Boranova et al.  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 115  
 heterogeneous effects across countries and sectors232, the sharp contraction in mid 
and high- tech imports in Russia will affect its short and long- term growth 
prospects233. In addition, global supply chain linkages could amplify the impact of 
such trade disruptions234.  
Chart 48  
GVCs have been resilient to the COVID -19 shock 
a) Revenue growth and GVC participation  b) GVC -related trade  
(sectoral revenue growth elasticity to GVC participation)  (share of total trade)  
  
Sources: Own elaboration based on firmlevelrisk.com, Thomson Reuters and ADB MRIO (panel a), WIOD Long- Run, OECD (Trade in 
Value Added), Trade Data Monitor (panel a) and Borin et al. (2021).  
Notes: In panel a we report the coefficient of a regression that  estimates over 28 sectors the impact of GVC -related trade share on the 
change in revenues during the shock and recovery phases of the 2008 GFC and the COVID -19 pandemic. In panel b we report the 
change in the share of trade in goods crossing more than one border over total trade in goods (i.e. GVC -related trade), as defined in 
Borin et al. (2021). From 2018 onwards, we nowcast it using monthly data on trade in intermediates and a business cycle proxy . The 
GVC -trade trend is obtained using the Hodrick -Presc ott high -pass filter.  
The recent global shocks on supply chains have reignited the debate over the 
optimal degree of international integration.235 At the beginning of the pandemic, 
reshoring in particular received a great deal of attention from the media and from policymakers.
236 However, there was at first only limited evidence of a wave of 
reshoring following the COVID -19 outbreak.237 A three- step survey conducted each 
year since May 2020 among senior supply -chain executives from several industries 
 
232 Baqaee et al.  (2022).  
233 Borin et al.  (2022a).  
234 Borin et al.  (2022b) and Knight et al.  (2022).  
235    Right before the pandemic, UNCTAD (2020) had listed four possible trajectories for international 
production configurations: first, reshoring, which would lower both the geographic dispersion and the 
fragmentation of production; second, regionalisation, which would imply lower geographic dispersion while maintaining high levels of fragmentation; third, replication, corresponding to greater geographic dispersion but less fragmentation within each cluster; and fourth, diversification/redundancy of suppliers. Two years later, strategies that actually appear to be under consideration by multinationals to increase the resilience of GVCs include diversification by increasing the supplier base, the overstocking of inputs and the relocation of production sites (Goldman Sa chs, 2022).  
236     In Spring 2020, the Japanese government announced subsidies for its international companies to 
encourage the diversification or reshoring or supply chains, Australia announced similar measures and the Indian prime minister declared that a new era of economic self -reliance had begun. In January 
2021, President Biden signed an executive order aimed at forcing the federal government to buy more goods produced in the United States, as a key part of his Buy American programme aimed at reviving domestic manufacturing.  
237    See firm -level survey evidence in, for example, Allianz Research  (2020), Coppens et al.  (2021), Di 
Stefano et al.  (2022) and Elfving et al.  (2021).  -1.3-1.0-0.8-0.5-0.30. 00. 30. 50. 81. 01. 3
Financial crisis Covid-19Shock
Recovery
20253035404550
1965 1971 1977 1983 1989 1995 2001 2007 2013 2019GVC -trade trend
GVC -trade nowcast
GVC -trade
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 116  
 has found that, in contrast to what they initially declared, by the time of the second 
survey round in 2021 many companies indicated that t hey had chosen to increase 
inventories and to dual -source raw materials rather than implement nearshoring or 
regionalisation strategies (McKinsey, 2021). Even though regionalisation gained momentum in the third wave of the survey conducted in April 2022 (A licke et al, 
2022), higher inventories and dual -sourcing strategies remain the most common 
measures taken by the firms. This evidence is in line with another recent survey conducted in spring 2022 on Italian firms,
238 which confirms that the share of Italian 
firms willing to close plants abroad remains very modest, while other strategies – 
such as supplier diversification and better inventory management – are much more 
commonly used to increase resilience.  At the same time, other recent surveys239 
provide evi dence that, at least in some sectors, the momentum of regionalisation 
may gain traction going forward, so a more substantial shift could represent a 
noteworthy downside risk  to global trade.        
The theoretical literature offers some possible explanatio ns as to why 
internationalised firms may be reluctant to move production sites.  One key 
obstacle is the considerable new investment required when moving to new locations 
and/or production sites. Investments that require large and fixed initial costs to start 
production in one location may induce a firm to maintain that location, even if a 
change in economic conditions means that that particular investment would no 
longer be as viable if the initial investment had still to be taken.240 Moreover, 
relocating may not be optimal if a shock is expected to be only temporary.241 In such 
cases firms might prefer to adjust the entire chain along the intensive margin (i.e. 
reduce volumes) rather than the extensive margin (i.e. relocate a part of the supply 
chain).  
The ex pectation that the COVID -19 pandemic would represent a strong but 
temporary shock may also explain why most firms appeared to embrace a 
wait-and- see strategy.  By the same token, expectations that the Russian war 
against Ukraine will have more permanent imp lications than the COVID -19 
shock may increase firms’ motivation to relocate production. As lockdowns, 
shipping gridlocks and shortages have lingered on in some countries and sectors 
and as the Russian invasion of Ukraine has raised multinational firms’ ex posure to 
significant cost increases and geopolitical risks, firms may start to assess the current 
supply chain disruptions as not so temporary and begin to reduce their global 
exposure more actively.242 Indeed, companies are now more actively discussing 
 
238    See Di Stefano et al.  (2022).  
239    See ABB survey cited in Robotics247  (2022).  
240    See Fillat and Garetto  (2015), Antràs  (2020).  
241    See Di Stefano et al.  (2022).  
242    A survey conducted among German firms in February 2022 reported that supply bottlenecks were 
firms’ greatest challenge. To overcome the situation, around 60% of companies said they were 
increasing warehousing and looking for new or additional suppliers  of raw materials and other inputs. 
Only 11% were planning to relocate a part of their production back to the parent company ( DIHK , 
2022a). With the war in Ukraine, significant increases in energy prices added to the existing supply 
bottlenecks but, once again, even among firms directly affected by the war or by the sanctions, only about 8% were considering the relocation of branches or production sites ( DIHK , 2022b).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 117  
 deglobalisation, reshoring and improving supply chain resilience in their earnings 
calls.243 
There is a large body of work showing that foreign shocks are transmitted and 
amplified through trade and GVCs.244 At the same time, international trade 
openness reduc es exposure to domestic shocks as it makes it possible to diversify 
sources of supply and demand.245 Although shielded from foreign shocks, local 
production tends to be more exposed to domestic supply and demand disruptions.  
On the supply side, reducing de pendence on inputs sourced from abroad 
systematically increases dependence on domestic inputs.  Box 3.2 shows that 
although this strategy decreases the impact of foreign supply shocks, it also 
increases potential disruption from local supply shocks such as the domestic 
lockdowns during the COVID -19 pandemic.246 Resilience to supply shocks could 
therefore be significantly enhanced by further diversifying inputs away from domestic sources or by increasing the substitutability of inputs across suppliers located in 
different countries (e.g. by making firms’ production technologies more flexible or by 
standardising inputs internationally).
247  
On the demand side, building indirect links with foreign markets through GVCs 
dampens the impact of domestic and direct part ners’ demand crunches.248 In 
fact, a higher level of GVC participation is associated with a lower elasticity of output 
to demand shocks from the domestic market or from direct trade partners (see Chart 
46, panel a, red line). However, it is also associated with a higher elasticity of output 
to demand shocks originating further downstream in the supply chain (see Chart 49, 
panel a, blue line).  Thanks to indirect connections with foreign countries, economies 
are able to smooth out the impact of idiosyncratic s hocks, reducing overall output 
volatility. Indeed, the volatility of GVC -related demand shocks is lower than the 
volatility of non- GVC demand shocks for more than 90% of country -sector pairs 
worldwide (see Chart 49, panel b).  
 
243    See Goldman Sachs  (2022).  
244    For recent literature reviews see Baldwin and Freeman  (2021) and Di Stefano  (2021). See also 
Alessandria et al.  (2010, 2011), Kramarz et al.  (2020), Carvalho and Tahbaz -Salehi  (2019) and Ferrari  
(2022).  
245    See Caselli et al.  (2020).  
246    See Bonadio  et al. (2021), Espitia et al.  (2022).  
247    See IMF (2022).  
248    See Borin et al.  (2021).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 118  
 Chart 49  
GVC participation dampens the impact of domestic and direct partners’ demand 
shocks, reducing overall output volatility  
a) Output elasticity to GVC and non -GVC 
demand shocks  b) Difference between GVC and non -GVC 
demand shocks variance  
(percentage change)  (cumulative probability)  
  
Source: Borin et al. (2022c).  
Notes: In panel a,  we estimate an equation where changes in output at the country -sector level are regressed on country -sector GVC -
forward participation in output, country -sector GVC and non- GVC demand shocks, and a set of interactions and other controls. The 
blue (yellow) line reports the overall elasticity of gross output to GVC (non -GVC) shocks for different deciles of the GVC -participation 
distribution. In panel b, we compute the difference between the standard deviation of the GVC and non -GVC shocks at the country -
sector level and plot its distribution for emerging and advanced countries. For more details of the estimation of GVC and non- GVC 
shocks and the measures of GVC participation, see Borin et al. (2021, 2022c).  
All in all, these insights support the view that participating in GVCs reduces overall exposure to economic shocks.  From this perspective, therefore, reshoring 
may not be a valid strategy for increasing resilience. Regionalisation of value chains, 
through nearshoring or “friendshoring”, presents an intermediate profile of exposure 
to risk, as geographically (and geopolitically) closer countries are usually exposed to very similar (or highly correlated) supply and demand shocks to t he local economy. 
Instead, an optimal strategy for reducing the potential impact of shocks would be to diversify both the supplier and the customer base. This suggests that, in addition to the trade- off between efficiency and resilience, firms and policymakers should also 
consider the trade- off between exposure to global and local shocks when evaluating 
the optimal degree to which GVCs should be globalised and diversified.  
Overall, the available evidence indicates that the shock of the COVID -19 
pandemic has  not – at least so far – resulted in “the end of globalisation”. On 
the contrary, the health crisis has underlined the relevance of GVCs in driving the recovery. At the firm level, instead of mass reshoring, the pandemic has resulted in strategies being developed which increase the resilience of production chains. There 
is also a solid body of literature indicating that although GVCs contribute to the 
transmission of foreign- originated shocks, they are effective in shielding firms from 
local shocks and, on the whole, tend to reduce risk. At the same time, in contrast to 
the COVID -19 pandemic which was a common shock dealt with through a certain 
degree of global cooperation, the war in Ukraine may be a game- changer in terms of 
the way major powers are likely to look at globalisation going forward. This might pose obstacles to GVC resilience.  0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9GVC shock
Non-GVC shock
0. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 91. 0
-0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0 0. 1Emerging
Advanced
Global
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 119  
 From a policy perspective, it is essential to evaluate any policy intervention by 
comparing its costs, in the form of reduced specialisation and diversification, 
to its benefits, in the form of greater supply chain resilience.249 From an OSA 
perspective, one major reason for a policy intervention could be a need to reduce 
vulnerability to supply disruptions in strategic industries in which the possibilities of diversification are intrinsically limited as suppliers or customers are either few in 
number or geographically concentrated. A second reason could be moral hazard-
type behaviour by private firms that do not fully internalise the impact of their own production- chain decisions on economy -wide risks. Notable industries which may 
require some form of policy action – such as stockpiling management or sourcing 
diversification –  are medical supplies, food products, semiconductors and CRMs. A 
third reason relates to informational issues. Some GVCs are so complex that large 
firms may find it hard to fully control and monitor their own supply structure.
250 Small 
firms, on the other hand, may not have enough resources to investigate their own supply chains in detail. For this reason, a lack of information on input sourcing could 
lead to misjudgements over the risks implied by a particular supply structure for firms 
of all sizes. Policies promoting information sharing at the international level and 
stress testing could enhance firms’ risk evaluation and contribute to informed 
decision- making.
251 
3.2.2 Financial sanctions  
EU financial integration has advanced hand -in-hand with EMU and has 
improved the EU’s ability to take credible action during episodes of stress.  EU 
financial integration has come a long way since the launch of EMU in 1992. The 
integration of banking and capital markets, though still in complete, supported the 
euro area’s resilience during the pandemic when monetary and prudential policy 
responses –  and the banking system in particular – withstood the fallout. In addition, 
during Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine, close cooperation over various aspects 
of EU financial decision- making made it possible for EU financial sanctions to be 
adopted swiftly and implemented consistently, while minimising the burden on the 
financial system.   
At the same time, due to its high degree of trade openne ss but relatively minor 
role in the international financial system, the EU is vulnerable to secondary 
sanctions imposed by countries at the centre of key global networks. Sanctions 
are a legitimate tool of foreign policy. Nevertheless, countries at the centre of key 
global payment and financial networks (in particular the United States) can use their 
position to impose extra- territorial sanctions, thus unilaterally affecting EU banks and 
companies. Farrell and Newman (2019) argue that in asymmetric network structures 
that centralise power in key nodes, states with effective jurisdiction over such nodes can “weaponise interdependence” for strategic purposes (e.g. to gather valuable 
information or to deny network access to adversaries). Although the United States 
 
249    See Baldwin and Freeman  (2021).  
250    See Alicke et al.  (2020).  
251    See D'Aguanno et al.  (2021) and Miroudot ( 2020a , 2020b ). 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 120  
 has imposed sanctions with potential extra- territorial effects on many occasions in 
the past, some of which were counteracted by the EU through diplomatic channels, 
one case which stands out is the imposition of sanctions on Iran in 2018.252 Faced 
with the prospect of losing access to US capital markets and US -bank intermediated 
financial networks, EU banks and companies chose in this case to comply pre-emptively with the sanctions.  
The European Commission is currently reviewing its Blocking Statute in a 
search for additional tools which could further deter and counteract the 
unlawful extra -territorial application of sanctions to EU operators by countries 
outside the EU. The EU introduced the Blocking Statute in 1996 in response to US 
extra- territorial sanctions on Cuba, Iran and Libya (Council Regulation (EC) 
No 2271/96, further updated in 2018 to include sanctions on Iran). The Blocking 
Statute stipulates that EU operators should not comply with extra- territorial 
sanctions, given that the EU does not rec ognise their applicability to/effects on EU 
operators. However, the Regulation was never enforced. In a recent 
communication,
253 the European Commission announced that it would review the 
Statute to find policy options which could further deter and counteract the application 
of extra- territorial sanctions. The Commission said it would seek to strengthen 
international cooperation on sanctions, in particular among G7 countries.  
Financial sanctions, such as those imposed in the context of the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine, may have longer -term consequences for central banks.254 
One consequence could be the fragmentation of the international payments and financial system along geopolitical lines. According to some commentators, for 
example, it is possible that China might renew its efforts to develop its own Cross -
Border Interbank Payment System (CIPS) and internationalise its currency. Although 
the Chinese system is still underdeveloped in comparison with the US or European 
systems, it could increase its appeal  not only to countries that fear western sanctions 
but also to countries seeking to position themselves in a world dominated by geopolitical blocks.
255 Another consequence could be a shift in the international 
status of currencies (see subsection 3.3.6). The impact of sanctions may also be 
intertwined with the development of digital financial technologies and digital 
currencies, including CBDCs and cross -border CBDC payment networks. Finally, the 
intensive use of financial sanctions could result in the dilut ion of their power, 
prompting major countries to seek alternative types of sanction in the future.256   
So far the direct effect of sanctions imposed on European banks as a result of the war in Ukraine seems to be contained at aggregate level, although it i s still 
significant for a small number of European banks.
257 As a direct manifestation of 
 
252    See Geranmayeh and Rapnouil  (2019) for an account of this episode and a history of EU -US 
interactions in respect of extra -territorial sanctions. For a legal perspective see  Lohmann  (2019).  
253    European Commission  (2021i).  
254    See here for an overview of the sanctions imposed on Russia.  
255    See, for example, Nölke  (2022),  Eichengreen  (2022) and Ivanova et al.  (2022).  
256    See Harrell and Rosenberg  (2019).  
257    See European Central Bank  (2022b ). 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 121  
 the war, Sberbank Europe AG and its subsidiaries in Croatia, Slovenia258 and the 
Czech Republic259 have been declared failing or likely to fail, while for Cyprus’ RCB 
Bank, following its decision to voluntarily phase out its banking operations, the ECB 
has approved several measures including the restriction of business and the 
appointment of a temporary administrator to closely monitor the bank’s liquidity and 
capital pos ition and oversee the orderly repayment of its depositors.  The Amsterdam 
Trade Bank, for its part, went into resolution. These cases did not produce any 
contagion effects and were promptly tackled by the ECB, together with the national 
competent authorities. The fact that potential financial instability has been contained 
indicates that the substantial progress made by the banking union may make it easier to withstand (geopolitical) shocks and the implementation of OSA policies.  
3.3 Strengthening the EU and EM U and OSA  
3.3.1  EU banking and capital markets  
Further –  and more robust – financial integration in the EU is essential in a 
geopolitical environment producing adverse shocks and, moreover, does not entail notable trade- offs with regard to the EU’s openness. Completing the 
banking union in the appropriate sequence and deepening the capital markets union 
would improve EU and euro area economic resilience. Together with sustainable 
domestic fiscal and economic policies, this would in turn make the EU a more attrac tive landscape for investors. Such integration does not seem to entail notable 
trade- offs with regard to the openness of the EU/euro area to the rest of the world. 
Making the EU and the euro area more attractive to foreign capital would instead allow the E U to use its economic weight to steer openness in a rules -based direction 
and defend its values and standards at home and in relation to other parts of the world. This is something it already does to a certain degree via the so- called 
Brussels effect.
260  
A completed banking union would also facilitate sound financing in times of 
global stress.  Establishing the banking union – with the creation of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism – was a key step 
towards increasing the stability of the euro area financial system.261 For example, 
after the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, euro area banks’ non-performing loans decreased from 8% in 2014 to about 2% at the end of 2021.
262 
Bank capitalisation has also improved. A s a result, euro area banks entered the 
pandemic crisis in good shape, allowing them to provide credit to companies and 
 
258    Banka Slovenije implemented a solution on 1 March 2022 that allowed all customers to transact as 
normal and have their funds fully at their disposal as of 2 March 2022. An agr eement was reached for 
the sale of Sberbank banka to the largest banking group in Slovenia, Nova Ljubljanska banka. This 
ensured that all customers of Sberbank banka in Slovenia were able to use their banking services as 
normal as of 2 March 2022. For more  details see here. 
259    See press release .  
260    See Lagarde  (2022a).  
261    See De Guindos  (2021).  
262    See Enria  (2022). 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 122  
 households when it was needed. A more efficient and profitable banking sector 
resulting from cross -border integration as we move towards  complete banking union 
would also have more resources to finance the green and digital transitions and to 
compete internationally. This policy agenda would allow some of the stated goals of the strategic autonomy agenda to be reached by different means.  
The twin transition – accelerated by energy security concerns at the current 
juncture –  is an opportunity to support further EU financial integration and set 
the standard in green capital markets, where the EU’s presence is already 
significant. The investment needs associated with the green transition and 
achieving energy autonomy from Russia are sizable. For example, the European 
Commission estimates that reducing fossil fuel dependence from Russia to zero will 
require €33.3 billion to be mobilised per year , on average, until 2030, in addition to 
the Fit -for-55 objectives. Moreover, the Commission estimates that the energy -
related investments needed to achieve the EU’s 2030 climate targets amount to €466 billion per year, on average, until 2030, at 2022 pric es.
263 This amount 
excludes investment in the transport sector as well as “wider environmental 
investments”. If these additional components are included, the overall volume of 
green investment for the period 2021- 30 reaches €1.2 trillion, on average, per year. 
This corresponds to a yearly increase of €520 billion on the annual average for the 
previous decade. A strong and robust domestic financial sector will be key to 
mobilising private investment to deliver on the twin transition objectives. In addition, 
further progress on the sustainable agenda would be conducive to maintaining the euro’s lead as the global green currency. The international issuance of green bonds 
denominated in euro almost doubled in volume to €41 billion in 2021. However, the 
share of t he euro in this market segment declined by 5 percentage points to around 
30%, amid a high level of issuance of green bonds denominated in the US dollar and 
other currencies.
264 Additional green bond issuance under the NGEU instrument, 
also taking the REPowerEU objectives into account, could contribute further to 
enhancing the EU’s presence in green capital markets.  
3.3.2  Safe assets  
From an OSA perspective, the availability of an adequate amount of debt in 
euro considered as safe assets265 could support the smooth transmission of 
 
263    See Panetta (2022a).  
264    See the European Central Bank  (2022c ) 
265    The issuance of assets to an extent that makes them unsafe does not comply with the definition of 
safe assets here, which are assumed to be in high (and possibly increasing) demand in all parts of 
the world. The debate about that issuance limit (or the impact of debt on growth as per Reinhart and 
Rogoff , 2010) is beyond the scope of this report. In general, three factors contribute to making 
government bonds a safe asset: (i) the quality of the institutions of the issuing economy, (ii) the size 
of the debt market and, importantly, (iii) whether the asset has behaved as a safe asset in the past 
(Habib et al. , 2020). For a policy discussion on European safe assets see ESRB High -Level -Task-
Force on safe assets . On the potential contribution of sa fe assets to financial stability and the 
banking union, see ECB FIS Special Feature B, March (2020). In the broader context of EMU 
deepening, risk sharing an d market discipline, see Bénassy -Quéré et al. (2018). For an overview of 
the literature on safe assets see, for example, Leandro and Zettelmeyer (2018) and Codogno and 
van den Noord (2019). From a financial intermedi ation perspective see, for example, Golec and 
Perotti  (2017). On the interaction of European and national safe assets, see Bruegel  (2021)  and 
Cioffi et al. (2019). See also Caballero et al. (2017) on the safe asset short age conundrum.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 123  
 monetary policy and the stability of the European financial system, which in 
turn may boost the confidence of market participants that assets are safe. This 
implies that not only domestic but also – especially – international investors are likely 
to maintain if not increase their demand during times of geopolitical stress, thus enhancing financial stability and financial integration.
266 This is also because safe 
assets enjoy, by definition, deep and liquid markets even under times of (severe) 
stress. With specific regard to government debt, as Chart 50 shows, relatively few 
national and supranational bonds in the EU are highly rated in comparison with the 
deepest and most liquid market for US treasuries (although in relation to GDP the difference is smaller).
267 
Chart 50  
Highly rated government bonds in the euro area and other economies  
(outstanding general government debt securities, USD trillions)  
 
Sources: BIS, Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, European Commission and ECB  calculations.  Reproduced from Grynberg  and Habib  
(2021a) . 
Notes: The data refer to total debt securities issued by the government. Planned issuance for NGEU. The latest Moody’s local 
currency long- term sovereign debt rating is reported for each country and NGEU. The observations are for the third quarter of 2020 for 
the amount outstanding of debt securities and for March 2021 for credit ratings.  
The issuance of safe assets brings mutually reinforcing benefits related to the better functioning and deepening of banking and capital markets.  Sustainable 
and reliable policies implemented by Member States and the EU/euro area are key if their debt is to be assessed by market participants as safe. This makes financing easier and sets a benchmark for the pricing of other assets in the economy. It also 
helps to increase financial integration and stability and fosters the development of 
the capital markets union and the banking union.  
Safe assets provide the bedrock of international reserves held by central banks. This can imply close ties and welcome dependencies, which may even 
reduce antagonism – at least to a certain degree – but can also bear risks. 
 
266    See Alogoskoufis et al.  (2020) . 
267    Specifically, at end -2021, euro area government debt totalled €11.7 trillion (or 96% of GDP) while the 
debt of the most prominent global issuer of government safe assets, namely the US federal 
government, totalled USD 29.6 trillion (or 123% of GDP). Data are sourced from Eurostat and Federal Reserve Economic Data. The BIS end -2021 USD/EUR exchange rate is used. This does not 
imply that high debt levels are desirable for the purposes of safety: while debt levels should not raise investors’ doubts over the safety of safe assets, depth and liquidity are key aspects of safe asset markets. Aaa
A1
A1
Aa3A t o BaAaAaaNGEU + SURE (Aaa)
0510152025
United S tat es Japan China United K ingdom Eur o ar ea
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 124  
 Cross -border  investments in safe assets create ties not only between international 
partners but also between potential adversaries, which could help to minimise 
antagonism. In this regard it is worth recalling that prior to its invasion of Ukraine Russia was one of the biggest reserve holders of euro- denominated official reserves 
(see Chart 51) while China is by far the biggest holder of US treasuries. In turbulent times, the willingness of investors to hold such assets may also provide a stabilising incentive for both the issuer and the holder. Certainly, in a scenario in which there 
has been a breakdown in trust between the issuers and the holders of safe assets 
because of geopolitical conflict, selling off such assets may lead to instability or to the use of such asset holdings, among others, for the purposes of financial sanctions.
268 
Chart 51  
Evolution of euro- denominated official reserves by country holder  
(y-axis: percentage of total reserves in euro, 2018; x -axis: percentage of total reserves in euro, 2004- 07) 
 
Sources: COFER, IMF and ECB calculations. Reproduced from  Anaya Longaric and McQuade  (2021).  
Notes: T he chart compares the share of reserves in euro by country  in 2018 and the average share of the euro in the period 2004- 07. 
The size of the bubbles corresponds to the average amount of reserves held in euro between 1999 and 2018 by each country. The 
yellow bubbles are countries with exchange rate regimes closely linked to the euro. In 2018, Denmark was part of ERM II, Bulgaria and Bosnia and Herzegovina had a euro- based currency board, Croatia had a tightly managed floating regime and North Macedonia 
had an established arrangement with the euro as a reference currency. Country ISO codes are used for country names for the sake of 
readability.  
When sovereigns issue assets that are deemed safe they benefit from the best 
possible financing conditions, thus providing capacity which may also buttress anti -coercion policies.  If sovereign debt is seen by market participants as 
a safe asset, this allows sovereigns to finance themselves under the best possible conditions and to do so for the purposes of pursuing strategic goals, also in combination with and beyond the economic sphere (e.g. to buttress anti -coercion 
initiatives). In this context, if national or – especially – international investors are 
convinced of the stability of assets issued in euro, this can encourage them to engage in the European economy as a whole or in Member States individually.  
 
268    For example, Russian reserves rose dramatically from the early 2000s and, despite fluctuations, 
remained at some USD 600 billion until the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 when they fell to 
about USD 400 billion. They then rose again to about USD 600 billion when,  following the invasion of 
Ukraine, about half were frozen while the remainder has been decreasing.  AZBG
BA
BRCACH
CLCZDK
GEGHHR
KZ
KE KGMK
NO
PE
PGPL
PYRO
RURS
SE TR
UGUA
ZA
020406080100
0 20 40 60 80 100
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 125  
 The fact that issuance of debt at the European level is seen as safe has 
supported the financing of EU -wide initiatives and public goods in OSA -
relevant areas.  It has, moreover, boosted the confidence of investors in the EU’s  
ability and willingness to intervene promptly and effectively in times of necessity. The fact that common issuance is considered safe has also helped the EU and the euro 
area in the past to ensure the public good of financial stability and overcome 
financ ial instability (e.g. through the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism , the 
European Financial Stability Facility  and the European Stability Mechanism ). Another 
recent example is the temporary NGEU programme (see Box 3.5). The programme is being used, for example, to finance projects in EU Member States which are 
relevant to OSA, including strategic objectives in the context of REPowerEU. Some 
of these projects have significant spillovers to the whole of the EU and may therefore 
be underfinanced if this positive externality is not taken into account.
269 The related 
issuance of common debt (for financing such initiatives) increases the supply of 
euro- denominated safe assets for a predetermined timespan.  
The adequate availability of safe assets denominat ed in euro is a key factor 
underpinning the role that the euro is able to play as an international currency.  
Ilzetzki et al. (2020) find that a “comparatively scarce supply of (safe) euro-denominated assets” is the most important element “limiting the euro’s reach”, while they also highlight the lack of a financial centre, limited geopolitical reach, and US 
and Chinese dominance in technology research. Without the availability of safe 
assets in a particular currency, the potential use of that currency at international level faces a constraint. As Reinhart (2019) puts it, “investors, central banks and anyone in general who buys a currency isn’t really buying a currency, they buy debt.”  
 
3.3.3  An enhanced international role for the euro?  
At their summit in March 2021, euro area leaders acknowledged the role the 
euro can play in strategic autonomy in economic affairs.  Their conclusions 
stated: “We support strengthening the international role of the euro with a view to enhancing our strategic autonomy in economic and financial matters while 
preserving an open economy, contributing to the stability of the global financial 
system, and supporting European businesses and households.”
270 
Equally, the international role played by the euro depends partly on the extent 
to which the EU/euro area is able to achieve OSA and defend and project its 
interests abroad.  For the moment this ability is limited as the EU is seen by some 
 
269    Similar projects linked to the issuance of safe assets at the European level include the Support to 
mitigate Unemployment Risks in an Emergency  (SURE) programme which helped to mitigate the risk 
of very high unemployment during the COVID -19 crisis (see Grynberg and Habib (2021b) for an 
analysis of non-euro area investor demand for SURE bonds). NGEU bond issuances are expected to 
come to €807 billion, of which €387 billion is intended as loans. On the safe -asset qualities of EU -
issued bonds, see Bletzinger et al. (2022).  
270    The summit’s conclusions  came on the back  of several proposals by the Commission to foster the 
openness, strength and resilience of Europe's economic and financial system . 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 126  
 observers as “an economic giant but a political dwarf”.271 This most likely implies a 
vulnerabilit y from an OSA perspective that cannot easily be overcome and requires 
the completion of EMU and deep internal institutional changes, even in areas beyond 
EMU. Moreover, as explained below, the use of currencies for strategic purposes 
comes with both costs and benefits. The financial (and other) sanctions imposed on 
Russia in response to the invasion of Ukraine have sparked a debate as to whether 
this might be a catalyst for change in respect of the future international role of 
currencies, because of the res ponse to the sanctions not only of Russia but also 
other global powers like China. Any change is, however, unlikely in the near term.272 
From an ECB perspective, the cost -benefit balance of international currency 
status relates to several factors that have evolved over time.  These factors 
include seigniorage, transaction and hedging costs, the “exorbitant privilege” (lower 
financing costs) or “exorbitant duty” (exchange rate appreciation during global crisis episodes), the degree of monetary policy autonomy,  the extent of exchange rate 
pass -through and the transmission of monetary policy. With rapid financial 
globalisation, rising challenges to multilateralism and the adoption of new monetary policy frameworks across major central banks, the relevance of some of the 
traditional effects of international currency status has declined, while other effects 
have become more apparent (see Chart 52).
273  
The international role of the euro can support OSA in times of global financial market stress.  There is potential within EMU for sharing and strengthening the 
“exorbitant privilege” but the role of the “exorbitant duty” should also be considered. 
274 Enhanced status as an international currency can strengthen the global 
transmission of domestic monetary policy impulses, with potential reinforcing 
spillback effects on the domestic economy. In particular, if the currency is seen as a 
safe haven during times of global stress, the domestic currency would appreciate and the yields on safe assets in that c urrency would fall. International currency status 
also implies lower exchange rate pass -through, which helps shield inflation from 
foreign shocks. Depending on the nature of a global shock and the invoicing currency of imports, international currency statu s may also attenuate the effects of 
monetary policy on import prices. In such a scenario the volatility of monetary aggregates as a cost of international currency status would decline in prominence.
275 
 
271    See Bini Smaghi  (2006).  
272    See European Central Bank  (2022c), Dooley et al.  (2022), Brunnermeier et al.  (2022), Eichengreen  
(2022), Arslanalp et al.  (2022) and the discussion in Box 3. 4. 
273   See also  Gräb and Mehl  (2019)  
274    See Panetta  (2020).  
275    See European Central Bank  (2021c).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 127  
 Chart 52  
Costs and benefits of international currency u se 
Benefits  Costs  
Seigniorage  Blurred monetary aggregate signals (?)  
Lower transaction and hedging costs  Capital flow volatility (?)  
Exorbitant privilege  
(lower external financial costs)  Exorbitant duty  
(stronger  exchange rate in global stress episodes)  
Greater monetary policy autonomy   
Stronger international transmission of monetary 
policy with positive spillbacks   
Lower pass -through reduces impact of FX shocks 
on CPI  Lower effects of monetary policy on import prices  
Reduced exposure to unilateral decisions from 
third countries   
Sources: ECB and Coeuré, B. (2019), “The euro’s global role in a changing world: a monetary policy perspective”, speech at the 
Council on Foreign Relations , New York City, 15 February.  
From an OSA perspective in particular, an important potential benefit of the 
international role of the euro could be to mitigate the effects of unilateral 
decisions taken in third countries. According to some commentators, external 
factors have always formed part of the case for the single currency and it is perhaps 
no coincidence that the final push towards monetary union took place against the 
backdrop of the confrontational foreign economic policies of the 1980s.276 While 
such factors faded in the decade after the introduction of the euro, they have 
returned to prominence in recent years.277 The growing perception of a shift in global 
governance, from leadership built on trust and common identities to leadership based on hard power, has sharpened the focus on the potential advantages of international currency status.
278 In such an environment, being the issuer of a global 
reserve currency confers international monetary power, in particular through the capacity to restrict access to the financial and payments systems.
279 This 
consideration may be particularly important for maintaining OSA in circumstances in 
which the military power of the currency issuer is relatively modest compared to its 
economic or financial weight.280  
The Commission’s proposals o f January 2021 refer to the possible 
introduction of a digital euro and suggest that this could strengthen the 
international role of the currency.  The motivations behind the digital euro project 
are primarily domestic. Looking ahead, if the use of a digital euro in retail cross -
border payments were possible and if it were allowed – a decision that is yet to be 
taken – this could also have implications for the international role of the euro 
(European Central Bank , 2021c ). However, the effects would probably be small, 
because there are other forces (such as stability of macroeconomic fundamentals 
including inflation, depth of financial markets, open capital accounts, stable 
exchange rate and size of the issuing economy) that primarily determine the 
 
276    See Henning  (1998).  
277    See  Cœuré  (2018).  
278    See Cœuré  (2018).  
279    See Cœuré  (2019). There are those who argue that this  then also implies a greater duty to contribute 
to safeguarding global financial stabili ty. 
280    See Bini Smaghi  (2006).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 128  
 international use of a currency. In a general equilibrium model, the issuance of a 
digital currency does not change these fundamental incentives – hence the 
configuration of the int ernational monetary system. There may be more incentives for 
currency substitution, but that is primarily a problem for small emerging economies 
with weak fundamentals.281 
However, the implications of CBDC issuance for international currency status 
are not yet clear.  A number of countries have recently accelerated their plans for 
CBDCs, possibly as a means of increasing the global appeal of major currencies. 
Academic researchers have mixed views, with some suggesting that the creation of 
CBDCs will enhan ce the international role of currencies282 and others arguing that 
this will not be the case.283 There is therefore an ongoing debate as to whether the 
creation of a digital version of a currency – and if so which  version of it – would 
strengthen the global reach of that currency, and there are a number of questions 
still to be answered which require further research.284 The assumption in the 
Commission’s 2021 proposals appears to be that a digital euro would be beneficial 
for its international role. Be that as it may, even if a CBDC is designed purely for domestic purposes, it may still be a relevant indirect factor in OSA, that is, in terms of 
the development of the domestic financial infrastructure and regarding the actual or 
potential public digital currenc ies or private digital coins used in the euro area.  
 
 
 
 
281    See Ferrari et al.  (2022).  
282    See Eichengreen  (2021).  
283    See Rey (2021).  
284    See Panetta  (2021).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 129  
 Box 3.1  
Digitalisation, sectoral spillovers and the role of value chains  
In 2021, the European Commission established the “Path to the Digital Decade”, a strategic plan 
whose goal was to achieve the digital transformation of the EU’s economy and society by 2030. This strategy is based on four pillars: the development of a digitally skilled population, the establishment of performant digital infrastructures and the digital transformation of both business es 
and public services ( European Commission, 2021j ). Key objectives of the strategic digitalisation 
plan to be met by 2030 include an increase in the EU’s production of semiconductors, a boost to the digital intensity of EU firms and substantial improvements to the EU’s technical infrastructure. The 
digitalisation plan will be funded by grants and loans through several EU facilities including the 
Digital Europe Programme, Connecting Europe, Invest EU and a part of the Recovery and 
Resilience Facility (RRF). All in all, the projects related to digitalisation included in the 2021- 27 
multiannual financial framework are worth around 1.5% of EU GDP.
285 
In the first phase, the implementation of the EU’s digitalisation strategy is likely to increase European demand in the computer, electronic and optical equipment sector (“electronics”). In a second phase, these investments are likely to boost the productivity of the electronics sector itself 
as well as that of related industries. In principle, digitalisation could have a heterogeneous impact 
among EU countries, as there is substantial heterogeneity in how much value added to the final demand of the electronics sector originates in the different European economies. There is also 
heterogeneity in the relevance of this value- added to the different source countries (see Chart A). 
Also, digitalisation could give rise to extra- EU spillovers, since a substantial share of value added 
included in the final demand of the European electronics sector comes from countries outside the EU such as China, Korea and the United States.  Moreover, a demand and subsequent productivity 
shock to the electronics sector could generate inter -sectoral spillovers across the European value 
chain, resulting in price or productivity fluctuations in the sectors situated downstream or upstream 
of the electronics sector.  
In order to quantify the possible effects of the implementation of the EU digitalisation strategy, we ran simulations employing the general equilibrium production network model developed by Izquierdo et al. (2022). The calibration of this model relies mainly on Inter -Country Input- Output 
tables and literature estimates. It features nine countries/areas: Germany, Spain, France, Italy, the rest of the EU, China, Korea, the United States and the rest of the world. Our simulations consider two scenarios which differ in terms of elasticity of substitution between varieties of the same good 
(trade elasticity). As a first step, we assume that half of the multiannual financial framework 
digitalisation budget is destined for expenditures in electronics and that these funds are distributed among EU members, depending on the country -specific allocation of RRF grants and based on a 
country’s GDP. The resulting rise in the demand for electronics is modelled as an exogenous shock in the final demand of each country’s electronics sector and is calibrated in such a way that the increase is proportional to the funds it receives.  
In our baseline calibration, which corresponds to a relatively low value of trade elasticity,
286 we find 
that the shock would increase the nominal value- added of the electronics sector both in the EU (by 
roughly 70%) and outside the EU (by less than 8% in the economies we consider). It would also increase the price of electronics (by 25% inside the EU and less than 5% outside the EU) . The 
 
285    See here for details of the multiannual financial framework.  
286    In our baseline calibration we assume a trade elasticity of 2, in line with Boehm et al.  (2020).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 130  
 shock would also transmit inter -sectoral spillovers across the production chain, both upstream and 
downstream (see Chart B, panel a). In downstream sectors (vehicles, machinery, electrical 
equipment and telecommunications) higher input prices from el ectronics would result in lower 
value- added, while in upstream sectors (basic metals and plastic products) higher demand would 
tend to increase production.  
At the country level, of the four biggest EU economies, Germany and Italy would benefit the most in 
terms of GDP growth (see Chart B, panel b). This is due to the importance of German inputs to the 
EU electronics sector, as well as to the relatively large size of this industry in Germany and Italy, as 
a share of national GDP (see Chart A). In all EU countries the higher demand would result in 
positive, albeit contained, price pressures. The shock would spill over to extra- EU economies, with 
a positive GDP impact on Korea and China, given the relatively high importance of European 
demand for their electronics sectors. For the United States, whose electronics industry represents a 
smaller share of national production and is less dependent on European demand, the benefits from 
the shock, in terms of higher demand for electronics, would be outweighed by its c osts, in terms of 
higher input and goods prices, resulting in a small negative GDP impact. Higher substitutability 
between goods varieties produced in different countries would result in higher extra- EU 
spillovers.287 In the high elasticity calibration, Asi an economies would benefit from the demand 
shock to the EU electronics sector even more than European countries would themselves.  
As a second step, we assume that the initial demand shock is maintained and is followed by a total factor productivity (TFP) s hock that increases productivity in the electronics sector as well as in 
those sectors to which the electronics industry provides the most value- added.
288 In particular, we 
simulate that the TFP of the electronics sector increases by an average 20% in the E U countries 
under consideration and the TFP of related industries increases by 5%. We also assume that the 
shock affects EU members differently, proportionally to the size of their initial demand shock to 
electronics. At the sectoral level, the increase in productivity would result in significant spillovers, in 
both upstream and downstream parts of the value chain (see Chart C, panel a). At the country level 
(see Chart C, panel b), the increase in productivity would limit price pressures in the EU and would 
increase the size of internal GDP gains more than the extra- EU spillovers. External spillovers would 
still depend on the extent to which goods varieties produced in different countries are substitutable, 
as measured by the trade elasticity, but this feature would have a smaller impact on EU internal 
GDP gains than the demand shock alone. As the increase in productivity is assumed to be greater 
in economies whose demand for electronics rises more, the TFP shock would benefit Spain and 
Italy relatively more in terms of GDP growth. These countries would receive a larger share of RRF 
grants related to digitalisation and would, as a consequence, experience a bigger increase in 
electronics purchases in the first place.  
Our simulation analysis suggests that in order to limit possible price pressures stemming from the 
increase in demand as well as extra- EU spillovers, it is vitally important for the EU digitalisation 
strategy to support policies that focus on the increase in productivity in the electronics and relat ed 
sectors.  
 
287    In the high elasticity calibration, we use the sector -specific values estimated by Caliendo and Parro   
(2015), implying an elasticity of 10.6 for the electronics industry.  
288    In the EU, we identify electrical equipment, vehicles, other transport, telecommunications, machinery 
and other manufacturing as the sectors to which the electronics sector provides more than 1% of the 
value -added embedded in final demand.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 131  
     
Chart A  
Sources of value added to the final demand of the EU electronics sector (2018)  
(percentages)  
Sources: OECD (Trade in Value Added), Eurostat and IMF World Economic Outlook.  
 
Chart B  
Impact of higher demand of the electronics sector  
a) Inter -sectoral spillovers in the EU  b) Country -level impact  
(percentage deviations from steady state)  (percentage deviations from steady state)  
  
Source: Own calculations based on the Izquierdo et al. (2022) model.  
Notes: Impact of an increase in the final demand of the EU electronics sector, as specified in the main text. Downstream denotes sectors with a relatively high 
share of value- added originating in the electronics sector. Upstream denotes sectors that provide a relatively high value- added to the electronics sector. Panel 
b: “REU” stands for rest of the EU; “ROW” stands for rest of the world.  
 -1-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.200. 20. 40. 60. 8
Other transport
Vehicles
Telecom.
Machinery
Electrical Eq.
Basic m etal s
Plastic
Metal prod.
Chemicals
Downst ream UpstreamNominal value -added
Prices
-0.100. 10. 20. 30. 40. 5
REU
Ger many
Italy
France
Spain
Kor ea
China
ROW
USGDP (low elasticity)
CPI (low elasticity)
GDP (high elasticity)
CPI (high elasticity) 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. 91
05101520253035404550
EU Eur o ar ea Ger many Italy France Spain China US Kor eaPercentage offinal demand ofthe EU electronics sector
Percentage ofcountry GDP (right hand scale)
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 132  
 Chart C  
Impact of the positive demand and productivity shock to the electronics sector  
a) Inter -sectoral spillovers in the EU  b) Country -level impact  
(percentage deviations from steady state)  (percentage deviations from steady state)  
  
Source: Own calculations based on the Izquierdo et al. (2022) model.  
Notes: Impact of an increase in the final demand of the EU electronics sector, as specified in the main text, as well as the impact of an increase in the TFP of 
the same sector by an average of 20% in EU countries and by 5% in related downstream sectors. These are identified based on the value- added embedded 
in their final demand that comes from the electronics sector, with a 1% threshold (electrical equipment, vehicles, other transport, telecommunications, machinery and other manufacturing). In panel a, st ars indicate sectors featuring both an exogenous productivity rise and endogenous spillovers coming from 
the electronics sector through the production chain. “Upstream” denotes sectors that provide a relatively high- value added to the electronics sector. “ REU” 
stands for rest of the EU; “ROW” stands for rest of the world.  
Box 3.2  
Domestic subsidies and trade through the lens of a gravity model  
In its Communicat ion on a new industrial policy , the European Commission argues in favour of 
“reducing dependence on others for things we need the most” and in favour of developing Europe’s 
own products, markets and services. In practice, fostering domestic production in areas deemed 
strategic, or in sectors in which no meaningful industrial capacity is available within the EU, might 
require some form of public support. This is especially the case for sectors such as the semiconductor industry, which is important for EU’s twin digital and green transition and in which 
significant investment in R&D is needed to advance the technology frontier. Although domestic 
subsidies, or behind- the-border measures more generally, may be an appropriate tool for 
addressing market failures and reaching domestic policy goals, they may have spillover effects 
through international trade and may act as a tariff ( Hoekman and Nelson, 2020). This is even more 
problematic given that the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM) is 
considered by several Member States to be insufficient to tackle the use of market and trade-
distorting subsidies in certain jurisdictions. However, it has proved hard to reach a consensus on a 
reform agenda among WTO members. This leaves a loophole in the current set of rules, which may -4-2024
Transport eq. *
Vehicles*
Electr ical  eq.*
Machinery*
Basic m etal s
Metal prod.
Plastic
Non-met allic minerals
Downst ream UpstreamNominal value -added
Prices
-0.6-0.4-0.200. 20. 40. 60. 811. 21. 4
Spain
REU
Italy
France
Ger many
Kor ea
China
ROW
USGDP (low elasticity)
CPI (low elasticity)
GDP (high elasticity)
CPI (high elasticity)
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 133  
 favour the growing use of subsidies by wealthier and more advanced developing countries in ways 
that may ultimately widen the economic gap between economies.289  
This box reviews the most recent trends in the use of subsidies and other industrial policies. It also 
analyses the impact of domestic measures on international trade flows using a state- of-the-art 
gravity model (Heid et al., 2021; Beverelli et al., 2018).  
In the context of the widespread fall in tariffs, measures such as subsidies and other export -oriented 
policies with similar effects are increasingly being used to support domestic production. The data available since 2009 from the Global Tr ade Alert indicate that subsidies and other behind- the-border 
measures have been the major source of countries’ trade interventions. Since the GFC in particular , 
harmful trade measures (i.e. those deemed discriminatory against foreign commercial interests and 
covering trade in both goods and services) have outnumbered trade- liberalising measures across 
all types of trade intervention (see Chart A, panel a). Focusing attention on subsidies, 2020 data 
show that about 50% of the net harmful measures were targeted at the manufacturing sector, followed by services (around 25%) and agriculture (around 18%). However, in terms of their 
economic significance (i.e. when accounting for each sector’s share in global production), the 
services sector is most prominently hit by subsidies (15%) followed by the manufacturing sector 
(12%).  
Despite the lack of detailed cross -country data on the use of subsidies, an assessment of the extent 
to which they may be distortive to trade can be made by relying on (qualitative) informat ion from the 
Global Trade Alert database. Once these data have been combined with the Inter -Country Input -
Output tables from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and tariff data from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) database, we can esti mate a state- of-the-art gravity model in the 
spirit of Beverelli et al. (2018) and Yotov (2022). The final database spans the period from 2009 to 2019 and covers 62 countries and 14 manufacturing sectors. The estimated model, unlike standard gravity models , controls for domestic production flows as well as international trade. In this way the 
model estimates provide a gauge of the extent to which the imposition of subsidies benefits domestic production to the detriment of international trade. As a result, t he model estimates allow 
us to recover the relative impact of subsidies on trade relative to domestic production, a feat of 
analysis which is not usually identified in a standard gravity framework. Chart B shows that over the 
whole period of analysis subsi dies have been trade- distortionary by negatively affecting exports in 
comparison with domestic production, as firms have shown increased tendency to rely less on 
imported goods and services when awarded more subsidies to encourage domestic production. 
This result is driven largely by developments during the period 2015- 19, which was characterised 
by a return to inward- looking policies and protectionism (see Box 1.1).  
 
289    While there are  several aspects to the need for reform of the WTO ASCM, the element that is most 
representative of the current impasse is the standoff between large trading powers. On the one hand 
the United States, the EU and Japan have been arguing in favour of more st ringent discipline when it 
comes to the use of certain harmful subsidies. These include: excessively large subsidies, subsidies that prop up uncompetitive firms and prevent their exit from the market, subsidies that create 
massive manufacturing capacity wi thout private commercial participation, and subsidies that lower 
input prices domestically in comparison with prices of the same goods when destined for export. On 
the other hand, China has sought greater recognition for the role of subsidies in pursuing l egitimate 
social and development goals. For more details see OECD, Reforming industrial subsidies usage 
through the WTO:  process proposals.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 134  
 Chart A  
Harmful (net) measures to trade: the increasing use of harmful subsidies resembles protectionism  
a) Total  b) Select key technologies during 2008 -20 
(frequency count)  (harmful minus liberalising trade measures)  
  
Sources: Global Trade Alert (GTA), European Commission and ECB staff calculations.  
Notes: Frequency count is calculated by subtracting trade liberating (green/non- harmful) measures from trade discriminatory (red/harmful) measures based on 
the GTA taxonomy. The analysis represents full available country coverage. Other trade measures include capital controls, export quotas, FDI, finance, 
investment, migration, price controls, quantity controls, sanitary measures and technical barriers. Key technologies and their underlying use of strategic raw 
materials is defined by the European Commission. 
 
Chart B  
Effect on trade from use of domestic subsidy  
Relative impact of trade subsidies on domestic production  
 (percentages; elasticity of trade to domestic subsidies)  
Sources: GTA, ADB MRIO, World Bank WITS and ECB staff calculations.  
Notes: Vertical lines denote 95% confidence intervals around the point estimates. The structural gravity equation has been es timat ed using the Poisson 
Pseudo Maximum Likelihood estimator on two -year intervals, controlling for export -sector- year, importer -sector -year, exporter -importer -sector and exporter -
importer -year fixed effects. The subsidy variable is one- year lagged and interacted with a dummy taking a value of 1 for international transactions and 0 for 
domestic transactions.  
It can be seen, therefore, that not only has the use of subsidies increased recently, but the very use 
of such subsidies has also had harmful and distortionary effects on international trade by 
encouraging countries to become self -centred. These findings suggest that the case for adopting 
domestic measures needs to be assessed carefully as, given their detrimental impact on trade, they 
might have unintended effects (e.g. reducing the degree of GVC participation). This could increase 02004006008001, 0001, 2001, 400
2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019Subsidies
Export related 
TariffsContingent
Govt. procurement restrictions
Other
-20002004006008001, 0001, 2001, 4001, 6001, 8002, 000
Dr ones
Robotics
Fuel cells
3D printing
Sun harness
Sem iconductor s
Lithium batter ies
Wind harness
Electric motorsSubsidies
Export related 
TariffsContingent
Govt. procurement restrictions
Other
Total
 -0.20-0.15-0.10-0.050. 000. 05
Over all 2011- 15 2015- 19
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 135  
 the overall vulnerability of a country/sector to external shocks, with counterproductive 
consequences. In this regard, a strong case for the use of behind- the-border policies may be 
justified on efficiency grounds, provided that the measures target specific inputs and raw materials, 
such as those needed for key technologies. In this case they might have the effect of reducing 
vulnerabilities without harming overall trade, especially if it is difficult to diversify the sources of 
these inputs. Looking at the sectors in which subsidies and other types of behind- the-border 
measures have been applied, this appears to be case. Subsidies have been extensively used to 
promote the domestic production of inputs into technologies which should facilitate the digital and 
green transitions, as shown in Chart A, panel b.  
Box 3.3  
Initiatives to protect the EU’s digital space  
The digital economy is rapidly becoming the epicentre of conflicting interests. Over the last decade, economies of scale and scope have allowed a small number of large technology firms to pursue hegemonic strategies by leveraging their market power across the Single Market. Furthermore, 
competition for control of the European st andard- setting processes – which define control over the 
technology of tomorrow – is intensifying. In both cases, foreign actors play an active and major role, 
raising concerns over the EU’s ability to deliver on its core policy goals. This box provides an account of the main measures the European Commission is pursuing in the digital space from an 
OSA perspective.  
The European Commission has enacted a vast array of measures to ensure that the digital space remains not only contestable and open to innovation but also protected within the EU’s jurisdiction. 
The measures can be classified into two groups: measures to bolster control over technological 
standards and measures to bolster control over digital markets.   
With regard to standards, the definition of  a new policy approach on standards aims to strengthen 
the global role of the European standardisation system while shoring up control over its governance 
in order to avoid the “undue influence” of foreign actors.
290 The importance of the issue goes 
beyond technical product design as standards governing - critical infrastructure or cybersecurity, to 
name but a few, come with a significant strategic dimension.291 Specifically, in February 2022, the 
European Commission launched a new standardisation strategy, which was accompanied by a 
proposal to amend the current regulation.292 This intervention serves to avoid a situation where 
external corporate interests are unevenly represented within European standardisation 
organisations, to the detriment of the entire stakeholder community. In the same vein, the 
Commission also committed to enhancing European leadership in global standardisation initiatives by coordinating with like- minded partners and funding standardisation projects in Africa and in 
neighbouring EU countries.
293  
 
290    European Commission  (2022e).  
291    European harmonised standard adopted by a recognised European Standards Organisation (CEN, 
CENELEC or ETSI) following a request from the European Commission, are part of EU law and 
provide manufacturers implementing them across the Single Market with a presumption of conformity with the requirements of EU legislation, helping to reduce transaction costs.  
292    European Commission  (2022f).  
293    European Commission  (2022g).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 136  
 With regard to digital markets, regulatory action is currently being taken in the fields of competition 
and data governance with the objective of holding back the monopolistic power of large foreign 
technology firms.294  
As for digital competition, in December 2020 the European Commission proposed two legislative 
initiatives aimed at setting new rules governing the largest technology platform gatekeepers:295 the 
Digital Services Act (DSA)296 and the Digital Markets Act (DMA)297. These pieces of legislation 
address the systemic importance of gatekeeper platforms. The DSA provides for a common set of rules governing intermediaries' obligations and accountability across the Internal Market (including 
mechanisms for the protection of users’ fundamental rights online and for content moderation). The 
DMA seeks to ensure that gatekeepers do not leverage their economic power and that they behave 
fairly with third- party businesses operating within the p latform. The DMA and DSA Regulations were 
adopted in 2022 and enter into force in 2023.
298  
As far as data governance is concerned, the European Commission built on the current personal 
data protection legal framework by proposing, in November 2020, the Dat a Governance Act299 
followed by, in February 2022, the Data Act.300 These proposals set up mechanisms which foster 
data- enabled innovation (by facilitating business -to-business data sharing), enhanced data access 
rights, data interoperability, the reuse of c ertain categories of protected public -sector data, and 
increased trust in data intermediation services and data altruism across the EU.301 At this stage the 
Data Act does not include provisions that would enable smooth access to data generated by the 
privat e sector, which would support the compilation of official statistics. This is why, from the 
ESCB’s point of view, significant strengthening of business -to-government data sharing is required 
so that official statistics can make appropriate use of privately  held data during the compilation of 
official statistics.302 
Although some of the measures described above predate the concept of OSA, the strong focus on maintaining or bolstering control over critical elements of the digital space naturally places such 
measures under the logic of OSA. While the logic of autonomy and security may find support both 
within and outside the economic rationale, openness remains a key feature of digital markets, 
underscoring the need to take a balanced approach.  
 
294    European Commission  (2020o) , European Commission (2020p), European Commission  (2020q ).  
295    Gatekeepers are internet platforms providing services including online intermediation, search engine, 
social networking and others. According to the Directive, they must also satisfy several qualitative 
and quantitative criteria. The first category includes the competitive position in internal markets while 
the second includes market capitalisation a nd turnover above a certain threshold for the past three 
years. Platforms like Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple and Twitter fall into this category.   
296    Euro pean Commission  (2020c).  
297    European Commission  (2020d).  
298    Regulation (EU) 2022/2065 (Digital Services Act)  and Regulation (EU) 2022/1925 (Digital Markets 
Act) 
299    European Commission  (2020r ). 
300    European Commission  (2022h).  
301    The term “data altruism” refers to making data available without compensation “for purely non-
commercial usage that benefits communities or society at large, such as the use of mobility data to 
improve local transport” ( European Commissi on, 2020q).  See also Weyzen  (2021).  
302    See European Central Bank (2022d).  
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 137  
 Box 3.4  
The international monetary system’s transition towards more multipolarity?  
The global monetary order established following the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference was a 
reflection of  the geopolitical environment at the time, with the United States as the emerging 
hegemonic power in the capitalist world and the establishment of the US dollar as the dominant currency in international trade and finance. Since then, more than 75 years have passed in which 
there have been significant changes in the global balance of power, in particular the establishment 
of the EU, the fall of the Soviet Union and the rapid rise of China. These changes have also had ongoing implications for the international monetary system.  
An overview of the current international monetary system (see Chart A) suggests that: (i) the dollar 
is particularly dominant in international finance (debt and loans), (ii) the dollar is more or less on an 
equal footing with the euro as a global payment currency although (iii) the dollar’s share in official foreign exchange reserves is far greater than any other reserve currency’s share.  
Chart A  
Snapshot of the international monetary system  
(percentages)  
Source: European Central Bank  (2022c).  
The persistence of the US dollar’s dominant role has much to do with its robust underlying 
institutions and related policy credibility, deep and liquid financial markets, and free convertibility. At 
the same time, the dollar’s share in foreign exchange reserves has been slowly trending downwards over the past two decades, from 70% at the turn of the century to about 59% in 2021 
(see Chart B). Some commentators have suggested that this represents a “stealth erosion of dollar 
dominance” (Arslanalp et al. 2022) and, possibly, a transition towards a (more) multipolar international monetary system as far as official reserve currency choice is concerned (although not 
in the other dimensions of a currency’s international role). Interestingly, this trend has not been 
accompanied by an increased share of the euro, pound sterling or yen. Instead, it has been matched by an increase in the share of “non- traditional” reserve currencies such as the Chinese 
renminbi, the Canadian and Australian dollars, the Swedish krona and the Korean won (Arslanalp et al. 2022).   

 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 138  
 At the current juncture, there are a number of factors that could accelerate the transition towards a 
more multipolar international monetary system. For instance, it has recently been argued that the 
wide-scale implementation of financial sanctions by western allies against the backdrop of the 
Russian war in Ukraine could provide a fillip to countries seeking to bypass the US dollar and the 
euro in the international monetary and financial system.303 Still, it remains to be seen whether the 
“weaponisation of finance” will put a dent in the dollar’s attractiveness in the foreseeable future,304 
with several factors in play.305 In the long run, a decline in the size of the US economy relative to 
the global economy could reduce the ability of the United States to supply, elastically, a global safe 
asset that would meet the demands of an expanding global economy. It has been argued that this asymmetry may encourage the emergence of a more diverse international monetary system (Gourinchas et al. 2019).  
Chart B  
Currency composition of worldwide official foreign exchange reserves  
(percentages)  
Source: IMF.  
The emergence of stronger alternatives to the US dollar could also lead to a more multipolar 
international monetary system. In terms of existing alternatives, market observers have discussed 
whether the euro and the renminbi could, potentially, increase their international role. In the EU, the existing impediments to a more prominent international  role for the euro are being reviewed.
306 
China is actively pursuing a strategy to “internationalise” the renminbi through, for example, its swap line network,
307 but hindrances such as capital controls and other regulatory issues still have 
to be addressed (Otero -Iglesias , 2018). Nevertheless, steps have been taken through the 
“petroyuan” (a yuan- denominated oil futures contract), CIPS (an alternative to SWIFT), and 
 
303    See, for example, The Economist  (2022). For a more detailed discussion, see  Habib and Mehl  
(2022) . 
304    See also the two -part FT series on the “ weaponisation of finance ” in April 2022.  
305    For instance, shifts in the currency composition of global reserve portfolios might not in themselves 
necessarily herald broader changes; alternatives to major international currencies often lack the 
depth, liquidity or other economic and financial att ributes required to appeal to global investors; and, 
finally, the Russian invasion of Ukraine might serve as a reminder of the relevance of sound institutions, the ability to maintain price stability over the medium term, and geopolitical considerations as  determinants of international currency status ( see Habib and Mehl, 2022).   
306    For instance, the institutional foundations of EMU are also slowly being stre ngthened.  
307    The swap line network is, according to Chinese official communication, the main tool used to 
promote foreign use of the renminbi. The use of the digital yuan internationally is unclear. Renminbi clearing banks are also supporting renminbi payment clearing.   01020304050607080
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021US dollar
Euro
RenminbiYen
Pound sterling
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 139  
 international financing under its “Belt and Road Initiative”. At the same time, the Peoples’ Bank of 
China is progressing with the development of a digital renminbi, while closely cooperating with 
regional partners (e.g. the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the Bank of Thailand and the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates) to explore ways of incorporating digital currencies into cross -
border payment systems (the “multiple CBDC bridge”).  Despite these steps, progress in the 
international use of the renminbi has so far been very limited.
308 
This shows that the international monetary system is still largely dollar -based, although recent 
geopolitical factors are engendering a debate as to whether there could be a transition, however 
slow, towards more multipolarity. From a financial stability perspective, the emergence of a 
multipolar international monetary system may or may not be a welcome development. On the one hand, a multipolar system could be attractive because of the (competition- driven) disciplinary effect 
it could have on the policies of all reserve currency issuers, while it could also, potentially, mitigate the “Triffin problem” (i.e. by providing investors with alternatives in the event of a loss of confidence in the dominant currency) (IMF, 2010; Farhi, 2019). On the other hand, the transition to a multipolar 
system could itself be a source of (financial) instability ( Farhi and Maggiori , 2018).
309 For instance, 
investors might suddenly decide to collectively reallocate their reserve portfolios, which could lead 
to potential episodes of FX volatility if inadequately managed and unanticipated. Policymakers 
should therefore remain vigilant and should closely monitor ongoing developments in the 
international monetary system, while at the same time not becoming complacent over the potential for change. To quote Rüdiger Dornbusch: “In economics things take longer to happen than you think they will, and then they happen faster than you thought they could”.  
Box 3.5  
The contribution of Next Generation EU to the EU’s OSA goals310 
Next Generation EU is the EU’s response to the COVID -19 pandemic shock , although it also seeks 
to strengthen the EU’s economic and social structures as the Union emerges from the crisis. The short- term objective of the €806.9 billion
311 programme is to support the economic recovery, 
complementing monetary policy and national policy measures.312 At the same time, the package is 
also intended to improve growth prospects over the medium term through a focus on the green and digital transitions, while strengthening the resilience of the EU’s economies and social systems. Almost two- thirds of RRF funding requested in the euro area is currently allocated to Italy and 
Spain. With an allocation key favouring vulnerable European countries, NGEU will also contribute to the economic convergence of those EU Member States. The programme is temporary and will run from 2021 to 2026. This box briefly summarises the main elements of the programme, providing 
insights into how it contributes to the EU’s OSA by bolstering Europe’s energy and digital 
independence and strengthening, among other things, its resilience and economic cohesion.  
 
308    See Anaya Longaric and Di Casola  (2022).  
309    One or a large number of currencies may be stable equilibria while an oligopoly of a few c urrencies 
may be unstable (as per Nurkse, 1944).  
310    The box builds on previous work by the ECB Fiscal Policies Division, the ECB Supply Side, Labour 
and Surveillance Division and the ECB Working Group on Public Finance.  
311    In 2022 prices: €750 billion in 2018 prices.  
312  Central banks in the EU introduced monetary policy accommodation in the crisis. For an overview of 
ECB policies, please see “Our response to the coronav irus pandemic ”. At the same time, 
governments of Member States implemented a wide range of measures to stabilise the economy during the lockdown including, for example, short -time work schemes.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 140  
 The central instrument of NGEU is the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), which Member 
States use to finance their investment and structural reform plans .313 The RRF has a funding 
volume of €724 billion in grants  and loans – the equivalent of around 5% of the EU’s GDP. RRF 
funding is made available to Member States on condition that they implement the national recovery 
and resilience plans (RRPs) agreed with the European Commission.314 The investment and 
structural reform plans detailed in the RRPs contribute to six broad objectives: (i) the green 
transition (at least 37% of RRF -funded expenditure, including investment in clean technologies and 
renewables, the energy efficiency of build ings, sustainable transport, etc.); (ii) the digital transition 
(at least 20% of RRF -funded expenditure, including investment in broadband services, the 
digitalisation of public administration, data cloud capacities and digital skills, etc.); (iii) economi c 
cohesion, productivity and competitiveness; (iv) social and territorial cohesion; (v) health, economic, social and institutional resilience; and (vi) policies for the next generation.  
Following the outbreak of war in Ukraine and the resulting energy cris is, in May 2022 the 
Commission adopted the REPowerEU plan which, among other things, steers unused NGEU -
funding towards the objectives of energy autonomy from Russian fossil fuels and a faster green transition. Measures under the programme include energy s aving initiatives, the diversification of 
energy supplies and the accelerated rollout of renewable energy. The programme will be 
implemented by making targeted amendments to the RRF Regulation, which will make it possible to 
append a chapter with additional measures to the national RRPs (expected to be approved by early 
2023). Funding will be made available mainly through the unused loans under the RRF, which 
currently am ount to €225 billion.  
In terms of OSA, the first and overarching contribution of NGEU is to enhance productivity, resilience  and economic convergence in the EU, which has been outperformed by most other 
geopolitical players over the past two decades  (see Chart A).
315 Real GDP growth in the EU was, 
on average, around 1.3% in the period 2001- 21, around 0.6% lower than in the United States. The 
size of China’s economy surpassed that of the EU for the first time in 2021. Average labour productivity growth (GDP per hour worked) in the EU was only half of the one observed in United 
States (0.7% annual growth on average over the period versus 1.4% on the other side of the 
Atlantic. However, EU data include EU countries in central and eastern Europe, whereas 
productivity growth in western Europe fell well behind that of the United States. Given their relatively 
low growth and productivity , several Member States remain vulnerable to economic shocks, which 
would also have detrimental consequences for the Union as a whole. Successful implementation of 
NGEU may help in part address these problems.  
 
313  The RRF consists of loans (up to €385.8 billion) and grant s (€338.0 billion). The funds from the other 
six programmes are smaller: REACT -EU (€50.6 billion), Horizon Europe (€5.4 billion), InvestEU (€6.1 
billion), Rural Development (€8.1 billion), Just Transition Fund (€10.9 billion) and RescEU (€2 billion).  
314    Freier et al.  (2022).  
315  For a review of slow productivity growth in the euro area see Work stream on productivity, innovation 
and technological progress  (2021).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 141  
 Chart A  
Real GDP and productivity growth in the EU and other major economies 2002- 22 
a) Average GDP growth  b) Average labour productivity growth  
(percentages)  (GDP per hour worked, percentages)  
  
Source: Own calculations based on OECD data  
Many of the investment and structural reform measures in the RRPs are geared towards improving 
the economic prospects of EU Member States.  More than 80% of RRF -financed expenditure is 
expected to be allocated to relatively growth- friendly investments (see Chart B, panel a). Even more 
importantly, more than 1,000 investment projects are aimed at addressing some of the most pressing structural weaknesses in Member States, including those in the public sector, the labour 
market and the pension system (see Chart B, panel b). ECB staff have estimated the effects of NGEU on the euro area economy via a risk premium channel, a fiscal stimulus channel and a 
structural reform channel. Taking all three channels into account and assuming that fiscal and 
reform measures are fully implemented, the NGEU programme may  increase euro area GDP by up 
to 1.5% by 2026.
316 The effect is estimated to be significantly stronger for the main NGEU 
beneficiaries – just below 3% for Spain and 3.5% for Italy. At the same time, the estimated debt -
reducing effect of NGEU is moderate for  the euro area in general but considerably higher for the 
main beneficiaries with high levels of public debt. The public debt -to-GDP ratio may be lowered by 
more than 10 percentage points in Italy and Spain by 2031, thus suggesting some possible fiscal convergence.  
 
316    Bańkowski et al.  (2022).  0123456789
Japan EA EU UK USA India China0123456789
Japan EA UK EU USA India China
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 142  
 Chart B  
NGEU fiscal and structural reforms measures  
a) RRF -financed expenditure by statistical category  b) Breakdown of RRP reforms by policy area  
(percentages)  (percentages)  
  
Source: Bańkowski et al. 2022.  
Second, the RRF may make an important contribution towards closing the EU’s climate and digital 
gap and achieving energy autonomy from Russia (see Chart C).  
The RRF, and especially its REPowerEU complement, may contribute significantly to the EU’s energy autonomy . It should be noted that the focus  of the RRF is the green transition rather than 
energy autonomy. On average, around 40% of RRF spending contributes to climate action, as 
outlined in the “Fit -for-55” programme.
317 In Luxembourg, Malta, Austria and Finland green 
investment actually accounts for more than half of total RRF expenditure. Measures related to 
energy efficiency, renewable energy and energy networks also reduce the EU’s reliance on fossil 
fuel imports. Still, certain clean energy measures, such as the decommissioning of coal -powered 
plants in favour of gas -powered plants, may temporarily act against reducing autonomy. These 
specific measures, however, are likely to be dwarfed by the net positive impact of NGEU in terms of lower reliance on foreign fossil fuels. Overall, around €197 billion is expected to exert a direct or 
indirect effect in terms of lowering EU fossil imports. In addition, measures under the REPowerEU programme are explicitly targeted towards achieving energy autonomy, including by cutting gas and 
oil demand, restraining fossil fuel consumption in industry and transport, and diversifying foreign 
energy supplies. According to Commission staff estimates, reducing dependence on Russian fossil fuels  by 2030 would requi re €300 billion cumulatively – beyond the Fit -for-55 proposals to which 
NGEU contributes. By the end of 2027, this would correspond to an investment gap of approximately €210 billion, which REPowerEU aims to close.
318 
NGEU also supports the EU’s digital transition.  26% of RRF investment contributes to the second 
core RRF objective, with the share actually exceeding 50% in Austria and Germany. The largest 
share of expenditure will be used to digitalise public services, followed by investment in the 
digitalisation of the corporate sector, digital upskilling, fixed and 5G connectivity, the deployment of advanced technologies and supporting digital -related R&D. Around €80 billion is expected to be 
 
317  The EU’s plan to reach its climate goal of reducing EU emissions by at least 55% by 2030 is in fact a 
legal obligation.  
318  European Commission Staff Working Document entitled “Implementing the REPowerEU action plan: Investment needs, hydrogen accelerator and bio -methane plan”, SWD(2022) 230, 18 May 2022.  0102030405060708090100
IELUMTSIEEBEPTESGRITEAATCYLTFISKDELVFRGovernment investment
Capital transfers
Other expenditureSubsidies
Social payments
Other current transfers
0102030405060708090100
BEDEEE IEGRESFR ITCYLVLTLUMTATPT SISK FIPublic sector
Business environment
Labour market, education and social policies
Green/digital regulations and infrastructure
Financial policies
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 143  
 used to enhance the digital capabilities of the EU. In the short term, digitalisation may increase 
demand for extra- EU-produced digital technology. In the longer term, however, a more tech- friendly 
environment will favour tech start -ups or investment by foreign tech companies in the EU. On 
balance, these measures are likely to reduce the EU’s digital dependency by addressing the structural weaknesses of EU economies in terms of digital infrastructure and skills in both the public 
and the private sector.  
Chart C  
Contribution of NGEU to the EU’s OSA aims  
(EUR billions, left -hand scale; percentage of total RRF, right -hand scale)  
Source: Own calculations based on “European Union countries’ recovery and resilience” plans, Bruegel, 9 June 2022.  
Third, as a tool aimed at providing EU public goods, NGEU has been financed by a si gnificant 
volume of debt issuance at the European level, resulting in economies of scale and a notable 
increase in the supply of EU -wide safe assets.  The issuance of new NGEU debt is taking place 
between mid- 2021 and 2026 in the form of bonds of up to €150 billion per year to finance the non-
repayable grants and the RRF loans.319 This activity reinforces the EU’s role in capital markets as a 
major provider of safe (AAA -rated) assets denominated in euro (see Section 3.3.2). As of October 
2022, the Commission had already borrowed almost €235 billion for NGEU financing, of which €160 
billion was in bonds and €75 billion in EU bills. The maturity of long- term debt issuance was close to 
13 years. The implicit interest rate of these bonds was 1.41%.  
Fourth, the NGEU approach may provide new impetus for the EU to reform its system of own resources and contribute to introducing new resources.
320 The current system of EU Member 
States making direct contributions to the EU budget,  also known as gross national income- based 
contributions, is commonly seen as very inefficient. The EU budget is subject to extensive negotiation and the results are often a compromise that does not necessarily address pressing policy issues and is, in addition, not flexible enough to address policy challenges as they emerge. 
The RRF regulation foresees that these grants will be repaid by the EU budget via new own 
resources (i.e. new sources of taxes or levies).
321 According to the Commission, these new own 
 
319  After 2026, any NGEU issuance will be solely for refinancing maturing debt (to smoothen the 
budgetary absorption of liabilities over time) and will be limited in scale.  
320  The RRF loans will, in turn, be repaid by the borrowing Member States with a grace period of ten years from the disbursement date and annual repayments of 5% of the amounts received. They are scheduled to be fully repaid 30 years after disbursement (i.e. between 2051 and 2056).  
321    European Commission  (2021k).   Economic resilience
024681012
0102030405060
Buil dings' ener gy
ef ficiency
Public transport
Electric mobility
Renewable energy
sources
R&D, innovation
Economic, social, t err.
cohesion
Digital public sector
Digital skills, digital
inclusion
Digitalisat ion of
businesses
Inv. in digital capacities
SMEs
Hydrogen
Connectivit y
Labour market , job
creation
Green t ech innovat ion
Sustainabl e agri culture
Electricity grids
Digital investment in R&D
Infrastruct ure investment
Other sustain. transport
infr.
Non-building energy
ef ficiency
St rength of t he financial
system
Cr isis pr epar edness,
resilience
Green t ax incent ives
Greening the digital sectorEnergy autonomy
Digital autonomy Agricultural autonomy
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 144  
 resources would include part of the receipts from (i) EU emissions trading, (ii) a carbon border 
adjustment mechanism, and (iii) the new international corporate taxation framework. The repayment 
of RRF grants would only be funded through additional contributions by EU Member States if no agreement can be reached between Member States on the proposal made by the Commission at the end of 2021.  
The positive impact of NGEU on growth and resilience and, more broadly, on strategic autonomy will depend on the effective implementation of the reform plans.  The strong ownership of the 
measures in many countries and the RRF’s performance- based design should, overall, be 
conducive to such an outcome. At the same time, constraints in the administrative capacity  to 
implement investment and reforms, supply side bottlenecks , inflation and political uncertainty may 
pose significant risks to national RRPs.   
Box 3.6  
EU public goods and military spending  
This box provides an overview of developments in EU external security cooperation and defence expenditure, as well as some of the implications for defence capabilities and macroeconomics.  
First, the box shows briefly that recent advances in cooperation between EU Member States in matters of external security and defence have been driven by OSA considerations. Although t here 
has been some progress in recent years, such cooperation is still very limited. Second, by historical 
and international standards military spending at the EU level is still limited, despite recent 
announcements of significant increases in expenditure.  On average, spending currently stands at 
1.3% of GDP, which is below the NATO commitment of 2% of GDP. Although the military industry is 
quite concentrated in Europe, it remains divided along national lines, and the related EU public 
procurement market is  fragmented.  Third, most EU Member States rely on NATO defence 
capabilities, even though four out of the 27 Member States are either not NATO members or have 
not applied for NATO membership.
322 Also, command and control structures exist for NATO 
members but  not for the EU as such. This means that the military capability of the EU outside NATO 
structures amounts to a fraction of what it is for other geopolitical players, although the sum of military expenditure and the total number of military personnel in EU  countries are comparable with 
other geopolitical players. Fourth, the composition of military expenditure in EU Member States is 
unlikely to be growth or innovation friendly as it is heavily geared towards spending on military personnel rather than toward s R&D.
323 
EXTERNAL SECURITY POLICY IN THE EU  
Beyond economic policies, the typical functions of a sovereign state (fonctions régaliennes ) – 
including home affairs and justice, foreign policy  and defence – had already been included in the 
Maastricht Treaty of 1992. The second pillar of the Treaty was the Common Foreign and Security 
Policy (CFSP). In the ensuing years, the CFSP has been complemented in various ways.324 In 
2009, the Lisbon Treaty  introduced the “Mutual Assistance Clause” in defence (Article 42(7) of the 
 
322  Finland and Sweden have applied for NATO membership. Their NATO Accession Protocols were 
signed in Brussels on 5 July 2022 and have already been ratified by 28 out of 30 NATO members.  
323    This box builds on previous work done with Philip Muggenthaler and Marta Rodríguez -Vives, as well 
as comments from Ettore Dorrucci (all from the ECB).  
324  Key events have been the introduction of the European Sec urity and Defence Policy in 1999; the so -
called “Berlin Plus” agreement in 2002, which allowed the use of NATO assets by the EU itself (and not only by its NATO Member States) to carry out ESDP missions; the adoption of the European Security Strategy in 20 03; and the establishment of the European Defence Agency in 2004.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 145  
 Treaty on the European Union)325 and established the diplomatic service of the EU (EEAS); the 
European Security and Defence Policy (companion policy of the CFSP) became the Common 
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP).326 Nowadays the CSDP is an integral part of the CFSP and is 
managed by (the military arm of) the EEAS, which is in turn assisted by a few specialised agencies.
327 
The way the CSDP has evolved over the past decade is unprecedented –  it is now playing a key 
role in the broader development of the EU’s OSA.  Several recent international developments have 
led to advances in European integration in the areas of foreign policy and defence. These 
developments include Brexit, the threat of disengagement by the United States under the Trump 
presidency and its calls for European countries to increase their military spending in the context of 
NATO, the inability of EU armies to operate without US logistical support and intelligence in 
Afghanistan after the withdrawal of US troops and, more recently, the Russian war in Ukraine.328 
Three key initiatives mark this acceleration.  
First, the Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO), established in December 2017, is a 
framework for Member States t o jointly develop defence capabilities, invest in shared projects and 
enhance the operational readiness and contribution of the armed forces.329 The key difference 
between PESCO and other forms of cooperation is that Member States’ commitments made in PESCO are legally binding. PESCO is an intergovernmental process: the Council is responsible for 
the overall policy direction and decision- making (usually with unanimity). At the beginning of 2022, 
60 PESCO projects were active in seven domains (land, sea, air, cyber, space, training and 
education). For the first time ever, a PESCO project was launched at the beginning of the Russian-
Ukrainian crisis following a request received from Ukraine. The “Cyber Rapid Response Teams and 
Mutual Assistance in Cyber Security” project assists Ukraine to defend itself against Russian 
cyberattacks.  
Second, a new Commission Directorate General for Defence Industry and Space (DG DEFIS) was 
created in 2021 to support industrial development and competitiveness in the defence and space 
sectors. DEFIS also manages the European Defence Fund (EDF).  The EDF focuses on developing 
defence research and capability and has a budget  of €8 billion over seven years, consisting of €2.7 
billion from the EU budget (for collaborative research to address emerging and future challenges and threats) and €5.3 billion from co- financing by Member States (for collaborative capability 
development projects complementing national contributions). In July 2021, 61 collaborative defence 
 
325 Article 42(7) of the Treaty of the European Union provides that in the event of armed aggression 
against an EU Member State all other Member States are obliged to aid and assist that state  “by all 
the means in their power”, without prejudice to certain Member States’ specificities (i.e. neutral status) and NATO membership (“which remains the foundation of their collective defence and the 
forum for its implementation”). At the current junctu re, where hybrid (conventional and cyber) threats 
are increasingly common, the EU Council concluded on 20 November 2017 that particularly serious 
cyber incidents or crises could trigger the activation of the Mutual Assistance Clause. The major 
difficulties  in this context are evaluating the severity of the attack and identifying the actors and their 
sponsors with a reasonable degree of certainty: this is even more difficult for cyberattacks than it is 
for conventional attacks. The clause has so far been inv oked once, by France in the aftermath of the 
deadly terrorist attacks in Paris on 13 November 2015. For general background information, see the EU’s External Ac tion Service  (EEAS).  
326  The defence solidarity clause completed the de facto transfer of competences from the Western European Union of 1954 to the European Union. The Western European Union ceased to exist in 
2011.  
327  The CFSP agencies are the European Defence Agency (EDA), the EU Satellite Centre and the EU 
Institute for Strategic Studies. The latter two are former Western European Union agencies.  
328    In relation to recent developments and the EU’s capacity to react see, for example, Cladi  (2022).  
329  25 out of 27 EU Member States participate in PESCO. Denmark and Malta have opted out, although 
Denmark abolished the EU defence opt -out in its June 2022 referendum.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 146  
 research and development projects, with a total EU support of almost €1.2 billion, were approved 
for funding, of which €339.2 million was in the aerospace sector. Almost  700 entities are involved, 
including 178 from France, 156 from Italy, 147 from Spain and 113 from Germany.  
Third, in March 2022 the EU approved the Strategic Compass, which is intended to act both as a 
guide to shape the CSDP and as a measurement tool to assess progress made in providing greater 
direction and a common vision for the EU’s efforts in security and defence in the years to come.  The 
Strategic Compass consists of a detailed roadmap that identifies a set of common EU political and 
strategic goals  along the key dimensions (“baskets”) of EU security (crisis management, resilience, 
investment and partnership) in order to enhance EU strategic autonomy (including a “shared threat 
landscape” and regional priorities). Some features are worth noting: buil ding up a capability to 
rapidly mobilise 5,000 troops by 2025, a new emphasis on maritime cooperation, and the 
recognition of the military dimension of new technologies. However, the total number of troops 
attached to the EU Rapid Deployment Capacity is quite small by any measure, taking troop rotation 
and reserves into account.  
In May 2022, the European Commission published an analysis of the defence investment gaps in 
the EU, which include a defence industry that is divided along national borders and tends to 
discourage cooperation.  There are both short -term and medium -to-long- term gaps in all domains of 
military capability – air, sea, land, space and cyber.330 To cope with the short -term gaps, the 
Commission will coordinate procurement (voluntarily). It has also proposed an instrument which will 
incentivise Member States to participate, and which will amount to €500 million over the next two years. Looking ahead, European defence capability consortia will be established that will jointly 
procure defence capabilities developed in partnership within the EU and will benefit from VAT 
exemption and other financial support. In the long term, planning and joint procurement will be conducted by EU Joint Defence Strategic Programming and Procurement, involving the Member 
States, the EDA and the Commission. These will contribute to channelling demand for the EU’s 
defence industry, which is supported by the EDF.  
During the war in Ukraine, the European Peace Facility (EPF) has taken centre stage by funding the common cos ts of the CSDP military missions and operations . The EPF has an implicit solidarity 
dimension and fosters burden- sharing among Member States. By strengthening the capacity for 
peace support operations and for cooperating with third countries and partner or ganisations in 
military and defence matters, the EPF is helping to increase the effectiveness of the EU’s external 
action. Since war broke out in the Ukraine, the EU has decided to use the EPF to fund emergency 
assistance measures, disbursing six tranches of about €500 million to Ukraine for lethal military 
equipment and other supplies such as fuel, protective equipment and emergency medical items, 
amounting to a total of €3.1 billion. Additionally, the EPF has also granted €40 million to Moldova, 
providing non- lethal equipment, supplies and services.  
DEFENCE SPENDING IN THE EU 
Military spending more or less halved in western countries after the end of the Cold War.  The 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute produces long time series of total defence 
spending for all nations (see Chart A). According to this source, the United States spent an average 
of 7.8% of GDP per year on defence during the years of the Cold War (1950- 89), a figure which fell 
to around 4% of GDP after 1989. The largest five European countries (Germany, Spain, France, 
 
330   Short -term gaps include replenishing stockpiles used to support Ukraine, replacing Soviet -era 
equipment and reinforcing air and missile defence systems.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 147  
 Italy and the United Kingdom) spent on average around 4% of GDP on defence in the Cold War 
era. In Germany, Spain and Italy, military expenditure fell below 2% of GDP shortly after the fall of 
the Berlin Wall in 1989, while it remained above 2% of GDP in the United Kingdom and France until more recently (see below for details for other EU Member States). Russia’s total military 
expenditure has ranged between 4% and 6% of GDP since 2014 (the annexation of Crimea), whil e 
it was below 4% in the period 1998- 2013.  
Chart A  
Long- run trends in military expenditure according to the Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute  
(percentage of GDP)  
Source: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Military Expenditure Database 2021.  
Note: Vertical line marks the year of the fall of the Berlin Wall, also associated with the end of the Cold War.  
In volume terms US military expenditure dwarfs the expenditure of other countries (see Chart B) . As 
an aggregate and measured at market exchange rates, the combined military expenditure of EU 
Member States in current US dollars stands at USD 232.8 billion, in third place after the United 
States and China, which spent almost USD 800 billion and USD 250 billion respectively in 2020. 
However, given the differences in defence sector input levels across countries, measuring in “military- PPP” (military purchasing power parity) terms suggests that the combined military 
expenditure of the EU Member States, as well as that of China, Russia and the United Kingdom, is somewhat higher. In 2020, taking the US defence budget as a point of reference for military PPP, the EU spent around USD 400 billion, China spent around USD 450 billion, Russia spent around USD 200 billion and the United Kingdom spent around USD 90 billion.
331 
 
 
331    ECB estimations based on Robertson  (2021).   02468101214
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020United States
GermanyFrance
United KingdomRussia
ItalyChina
Spain
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 148  
 Chart B  
Expenditure on defence, nominal and in military PPP  
(USD and USD adjusted for military PPP)  
Sources: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, own estimations based on Robertson (2021).  
As a percentage of GDP, the EU’s average expenditure on defence amounted to 1.3% in 2020, well 
below NATO commitments (see Chart C).  According to official government finance statistics data, 
the EU shows an expenditure gap of around 0.7% of GDP for 2020 in comparison with the 2% of 
GDP NATO target (i.e. the minimum defence spending agreed by NATO members in 2006). 
However, four of the EU countries are not NATO members or have not applied to join NATO and have not, therefore, committed to the 2% target (Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Austria), while Finland 
and Sweden have recently applied to join NATO. The highest levels of expenditure on defence in 
the EU are recorded in Greece, the Baltic States and Romania (all above 2.3% of GDP), followed by France and Cyprus (both at 1.9 % of GDP). By contrast, the non- NATO members had 
comparatively low levels of expenditure (e.g. Ireland at 0.2 % of GDP, Austria at 0.6 % of GDP). The United States has the highest level of expenditure among western countries (3.2% of GDP, or 8.5% of total government expenditure), followed by the United Kingdom (2.2% of GDP).  
The Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022 may mark a turning point in the decline of 
defence spending in Europe, most prominently in Germany.  On 27 February 2022, Germany 
announced a historical turnaround in its security and defence policy, committing significant fiscal 
resources to strengthening its military capabilities. First, the government announced a €100 billion 
federal fund to modernise the country’s defence forces, equivalent to almost 3% of Germany’s 2019 
GDP or 0.8% of euro area GDP. The fund is expected to be established this year. It remains to be seen how quickly the additional funds can be used, but media reports indicate that the aim is to 
spend the money over the next five to eight years. Second, and in addition to the federal fund, the 
government announced that it will increase its military expenditure to 2% of GDP, in line with the 2006 NATO commitments.   0100200300400500600700800900
United S tat es EU United K ingdom China RussiaMilitary expenditures (2020 USD billions)
PPP-adjusted military expenditure (2020 USD billions)
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 149  
 Chart C  
Defence expenditure in 2020 and announced spending targets  
(percentage of GDP)  
Sources: Category 2 in COFOG data (Eurostat, OECD, IMF).  
Notes: Ordering is according to defence spending as a percentage of GDP. * denotes the countries that are not NATO members (although Finland and 
Sweden are in the process of joining). Announced spending targets according to media reports in October 2022. Spending targets may be subject to frequent 
revisions. NN indicates unknown time horizon.  
Other EU countries have also opened a policy debate or taken concrete initiatives on defence 
spending, which will take EU defence spending to 2.2% of GDP.  Poland aims to reach 3% of GDP 
defence spending by 2023 while Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Romania have set an objective of 
2.5% of GDP. France and Finland have also set  targets of above 2% of GDP. Bulgaria, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Germany, Spain, Italy, Hungary, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Slovakia and Sweden are all aiming for a target of 2% of GDP, albeit over very different time horizons. Finally, Belgium, Ireland, Luxembourg and Austria have announced more modest targets of below 2% of GDP.  
DEFENCE SPENDING AND MILITARY CAPABILITY  
In view of the EU’s fragmented defence structures, its military capacity is below that of other global players, despite comparable expenditure levels and personnel.  Chart D shows military capacity in 
relation to defence expenditure. The aggregated defence expenditure and the number of personnel 
in EU Member States is comparable with that of other major geopolitical players such as China and 
Russia (the memo item in the chart). However, in the absence of integrated defence structures the EU has no military capacity per se. Military capacity remains national in nature and even the capacity of the large Member States is a long way behind that of other major geopolitical players.  
  2025
2022
2023
2022
2025
2023
2024
2028
2023
2022
2024
2028
2033
NN
2024
2025
2030
NN
2030
2028
2027
2028
2030
2022
00. 511. 522. 533. 54
Greece
Latvia
Est onia
Romania
Lithuania
France
Cyprus*
Poland
Bulgaria
Italy
Finland*
Slovak Republic
Netherlands
Sweden*
Den ma rk
Ger many
Hungary
Cro at ia
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Belgium
Port ugal
Luxembourg
Austri a*
Malta*
Ireland*
United S tat es
United K ingdom
EU
Norway
Turkey
Canada2020-Eurostat
Announced government targets (where available)
NATO comminment
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 150  
 Chart D  
Defence spending and military capacity  
(x-axis: military spending in USD billions; y -axis: military capacity; military personnel: balloon size)  
Source: Global firepower ranking, Robertson (2021).  
First, the EU does not have integrated command and control structures.  These structures remain 
based in EU Member States and – for NATO members – are integrated into the defence alliance. As 
a result, it is difficult to determine the precise military capacity of the EU as such. Capacity remains 
relatively limited outside NATO structures, even when the Strategic Compass initiatives are taken 
into consideration.332 
Second, despite all the efforts that have been made to increase multinational defence cooperation, 
EU Member States’ security spending is still divided into 146 different defence systems. By way of 
comparison, the United States has 34.  This suggests that resource allocation is fragmented, which 
could hinder the construction of an efficient and effective European defence force. While 
cooperation has improved in recent years, the EU’s Coordinated Annual Review on Defence reports 
that “national approaches to capability development continue to prevail”. As a consequence, EU 
Member States  continue to rely heavily on non- EU arms manufacturers instead of in- house R&D 
capabilities. At this stage, the Member States and the EU overall are taking stock of recent 
operational cooperation in supporting Ukrainian armed forces, mainly in the areas of  interoperability 
and procurement.  
Beefing up an integrated defence policy at the EU level may involve reshuffling industrial 
capabilities across Member States and could require some downsizing of national strategic 
autonomy.  This is likely to impact the biggest industrial players the most. The defence industry in 
the EU is highly concentrated: it consists of a small number of companies based in an even smaller 
number of countries. In turnover terms, the EU’s top defence firm is Leonardo (Italy). Airbus (a 
French- German -Spanish consortium), whose defence turnover is, however, less than one- fifth of 
the total, is the second- largest player, and Thales (France) is the third. BAE Systems (whose 
defence turnover is higher than that of Leonardo and Airbus combined) is, following Brexit, now based outside the EU. The aerospace industry plays a special role in the EU defence industry: 
Europe has the second- largest aerospace industry in the world, with over 231,000 employees and a 
 
332  Defence spending and structures depend on national policy priorities and needs, which remain 
heterogeneous among EU Member States. Without a unified approach, which the Strategic Compass aims to introduce, it will be difficult to build an effective defence capability.   USRUCN
Memo: EU todayFR IT
DE
ES
-0.20. 00. 20. 40. 60. 81. 01. 2
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 151  
 turnover of about €58 billion per year. In the space sector, satellites play a central role in supporting 
defence systems and military operations and are also key civilian infrastructures. Galileo, the EU -
owned and operated global navigation satellite system, which went live in 2016 with Ital y and 
Germany playing a leading role, is both a forerunner and a milestone in the EU’s strategic 
autonomy. Finally, PESCO currently includes many space- related project.  
MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF DEFENCE SPENDING  
Military expenditure can be an important tool  for macroeconomic stabilisation and a driver of 
technological change.  Military expenditure can be concentrated in regions with weak economic 
structures, helping to create employment and infrastructure. In addition, military R&D is a driver of 
innovation i n aerospace and digital technology. The internet, for example, was developed by the US 
military during the Cold War and is, perhaps, the most striking example of military R&D generating 
high social returns.  
Although several empirical studies on the effects  of military spending on economic growth are 
inconclusive, many point to small positive or even negative effects.  Examining data from 1960 to 
2014, Dunne and Tian (2016) find that military expenditure has significant negative effects on economic growth for  a large sample of countries.
333 A meta- study of 169 estimates of the military 
spending multiplier by Alptekin and Levine (2012) suggests positive but small growth effects, decreasing with size of military budget (0.06 to 0.1).
334 
The growth effects of milit ary R&D spending are found to be considerably higher, possibly 
exceeding unity.  Becker and Dunne (2021) find considerable heterogeneity in the effects of the 
different components of military expenditure on growth.335 They show that the “aggregate is driven 
primarily by a negative effect of personnel expenditure, with some more limited evidence of a 
negative effect of operating and maintenance expenditures”. Moretti et al. (2019) find high 
crowding- in of private R&D on account of R&D defence expenditure. According to the authors, 
crowding- in may occur when (i) public R&D covers high fixed costs and makes some marginal 
private sector projects profitable, (ii) government -funded R&D generates technological spillovers 
that benefit private firms, and/or (iii) firms  face credit constraints.336 
It is believed that increases in defence spending mostly increase inflation.  Some early empirical 
studies from the 1980s find no relationship between defence spending and inflation (Vitaliano, 
1984), while others find that increased demand in an economic environment with relatively inelastic 
supply leads to price pressures (Nourzad, 1987).337 Apart from the conventional demand channel, 
higher defence spending can also impact prices through the supply channel. Because of the 
national and oligopolistic structure of the defence industry, higher demand can lead to supply 
bottlenecks. Looking at historical time series for the United States and the United Kingdom, Wang 
(2022) finds empirical evidence in support of positive bilateral effects of defence budget growth on 
inflation.338 
 
333    Dunne and Tian  (2016).  
334    Alptekin and Levine (2012).  
335    Becker and Dunne  (2021).  
336    Moretti et al. (2019).  
337    Nourzad  (1987) and Vitaliano (1984).  
338    Wang  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 152  
 From an economic point of view, military expenditure in the EU could be more productive (see Chart 
E). Almost 90% of EU defence spending directly or indirectly funds maintenance of the defence 
forces (1.2% of GDP in 2020). Expenditure on military R&D is very low in the EU, at less than 
0.05% of GDP in the large EU Member States excluding France. US expenditure on military R&D, 
at around 0.4% of GDP in 2020, is much higher than the EU average. Almost half (48%) of  total EU 
defence expenditure in 2020 was directly allocated to compensation of employees, followed by 
intermediate consumption (28%) and capital investments (20%). The United States and the United 
Kingdom showed a lower weight for compensation of military  employees, in favour of intermediate 
consumption and capital investment. Data for Russia also show a high share of compensation of 
employees and intermediate consumption, to the detriment of capital investment.  
Chart E  
General government expenditure on defence by type of transaction (2020)  
(percentages)  
Source: Calculations based on COFOG data (Eurostat, OECD, IMF).  
Notes: “Compensation of employees” is wages and salaries as well as employers' actual or imputed social contributions; “Intermediate consumption” is 
government purchases of goods and services; “Capital investments” is capital formation, including purchases of new equipment.  Pension schemes for military 
personnel are excluded and recorded under social protection (COFOG category 10.2).  
The growth effects of higher EU defence spending are likely to be contained at the current juncture, 
given the relatively small multipliers for public wages.  ECB staff simulations using the ESCB’s Basic 
Model Elasticities for the euro area, for example, suggest that the short -run demand effects of an 
increase in defence expenditure in EU Member States in line with NATO commitments could raise GDP growth by 0.2 percentage points by 2024. This scenario assumes that defence spending will 
be increased by all EU members (irrespective of whether they are NATO members or not) to reach the NATO target of 2% of GDP after five years. The assumption, then, is that EU Member States will 
increase their defence expenditure by 0.7 percentage points by 2026. This implies additional 
expenditure at the euro area level of 0.15% of GDP, on average, per year over the period, or additional financing needs of €427 billion in volume terms. The growth effects may be even more 
muted, given that at least part of defence procurement may be from outside the euro area. The 
picture, however, could change if military expenditure in EU Member States were to shift towards R&D and capital expendit ure. 
As for the impact of a higher level of defence expenditure on prices, increases in defence spending 
are believed to increase inflation mostly via the demand channel and to be limited in size – although 
the effects are probably underestimated.  Accordin g to preliminary estimates based on the ESCB’s 
Basic Model Elasticities for the euro area, the result of an increase in defence expenditure in EU  0 20 40 60 80 100EUROPEAN
UNION
UNITED
K IN GD OM
UNITED STAT ES
RUSSIACompensation of employees
Intermediate consumptionCapital investments
Other
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 153  
 Member States in line with NATO commitments will result in a very small estimated uptick in HICP 
inflation of less than 0.05 percentage points by 2024. This is likely to underestimate the impact of 
an increase in defence expenditure on prices, particularly in the current economic environment (the 
effect is likely to be amplified by the oligopolistic structure of t he defence industry). It may, in 
addition, significantly underestimate the importance of post -pandemic global supply bottlenecks at 
the current juncture, particularly for investment goods. Such bottlenecks may be exacerbated in an environment of generalised increased security concerns. Finally, a concurrent increase in defence 
expenditure may exhaust the existing global supply of these goods, thus accelerating price inflation 
for military equipment.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 154  
 4 Implications for monetary policy and 
other central bank tasks 
As this report has explained, the landscape in which central banks need to 
operate is being increasingly influenced by geopolitical considerations. 
Geopolitical shocks can represent a challenge to macroeconomic and financial 
stability, given that they have the potential to produce greater economic uncertainty 
and volatile disruptions to trade and financial flows. The impact and persistence of 
such shocks are greater the higher the nodal importance of the countries in which 
the shocks originate, particul arly with regard to critical goods and services such as 
energy, foodstuffs, raw materials and financial services.  As discussed in Section 1 
and Section 3, OSA -related EU policies could be interpreted as policies intended to 
address vulnerabilities to geopolitical risks such as those arising from key trade 
dependencies, integration into GVCs or reliance on foreign providers of financial 
market infrastructure services. EU OSA policies are also a response to the strategic 
autonomy policies of other major economies around the world. In some cases, these policies will imply costs and second -best solutions that the ECB will need to take into 
account.  
Effective OSA policies require common EU action. However, the EU’s differentiated vertical and horizontal integrati on may lead to differentiated 
national policy responses, which may hinder the effectiveness of EU -wide 
initiatives. Differing degrees of integration in terms of competence and governance 
in different EU policy areas (horizontal), and for different Member S tates (vertical), 
impact the efficiency and effectiveness of an OSA policy that is consistent with the 
EU’s openness and economic performance. For example, while monetary policy is 
an exclusive competence of the EU, EMU -related policies, such as financial or fiscal 
policies, are less integrated. Trade policy is also an exclusive competence of the EU 
but faces obstacles in terms of governance (see, for example, EU domestic 
obstacles to the adoption of bilateral trade agreements with the United States and China). Energy, migration and foreign and security policies are extremely relevant 
from an OSA perspective but are far less integrated at the EU level. In such cases, and unless national policies and EU -wide action work in the same direction, 
decision- making and implementation of OSA -related policies may not proceed in 
unison, introducing divergences between Member States. This may have implications for the ECB’s policies.  
4.1 Changes in international trade and financial 
integration  
As trade integration tends to b e positively related to productivity, a 
retrenchment in global trade flows may have consequences for this key 
variable.  Productivity is a key driver of long -run economic growth and, as such, is 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 155  
 crucial for monetary policy. It shapes an economy’s potential supply capacity and is 
critical for real interest rates, given its implications for firms’ investment and 
households’ saving decisions. In addition, changes in productivity have 
repercussions for firms’ prices and mark -ups.339 Two channels through which trade 
integration affects productivity are the sourcing of intermediate goods and import competition.  
Trade integration positively affects productivity through import competition, the sourcing of intermediate goods and export opportunities. For this reason, 
OSA -motivated policies including state aid, industrial policies, investment screening 
and export control may limit the gains from trade and may have implications for the level of competition and the structure of the market in EU/euro area countries. As 
Box 4.1 shows, OSA policies aimed at reducing import dependencies must take the 
effect on domestic competition into account. This, in turn, has implications for mark -
ups and price setting behaviour. If OSA policies were to reduce competition or give rise to t ensions between social partners, this could flatten the Phillips curve (Andrés 
et al., 2021) and decrease the effectiveness of monetary policy. At the same time, 
however, the interplay between larger economic openness and the increased 
reluctance of firms to invest in relatively risky intangible assets and digital 
technologies tends to favour “winner -takes -all” market dynamics. This could have 
implications for firms’ incentives to engage in productivity -enhancing investments.  
European OSA policies, as well as strategic autonomy policies implemented 
by other countries around the globe, may have implications for interest rates.  
It is important to ascertain whether OSA policies could lead to lower EU trade openness or higher diversification, and whether they ar e implemented unilaterally or 
as part of a global shift (see Box 4.1). Lower trade openness may have a depressing effect on interest rates as it could erase productivity gains from international trade. However, higher import diversification, if focused on reducing key import 
dependencies on some countries, such as emerging Asia or oil producers, may have a positive effect on global interest rates, as savings in these countries, channelled through international markets, have had an important effect on depres sing global 
interest rates.
340 
A retrenchment of globalisation and OSA policy responses could also affect 
the recent common downward trend in the natural rate of interest.  Some 
authors suggest that the common decline in the natural rate estimated in the pre-
COVID -19 period is rooted in similar country -specific experiences that reflect 
demographic or technological developments and are not related to globalisation 
(Rachel and Smith, 2015). Others point to the role of global drivers, including the role 
 
339    See Box 4 in the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on globalisation , 2021), or Goldin et al.  (2020).  
340    See the ECB strategy review ( Work stream on globalisation , 2021).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 156  
 of financial integration341 and trade globalisation.342 OSA -type policy actions at the 
global level (not only at the EU level) that reduce the level of financial and trade 
integration, the free movement of people and the diffusion of technology across economic areas  may alter the pre- COVID -19 downward trend in natural interest 
rates. This has implications for central banks’ monetary policy space.  
A wider and more persistent reversal of globalisation trends through 
geopolitical shocks and OSA policies could have notab le implications for 
domestic labour markets and could, thereby, also directly affect the conduct of 
monetary policy.  For example, barriers to the free movement of labour and trade in 
goods and services or a major rebalancing of GVCs could reverse some of t he 
domestic labour market trends of the past few decades, leading to rises in wages and production costs. The impact of migration in particular is multifaceted – it is both 
theoretically ambivalent and empirically unclear. Central banks should therefore 
consider carefully whether it will lead to significant changes in the supply of labour.  
OSA policies that target specialisation across EU/euro area countries could 
impinge on the transmission of monetary policy. OSA -like policies that target 
near or reshoring could foster either economic convergence or economic divergence 
across EU/euro area countries. This would depend, for instance, on the types of 
goods and technological processes at stake. If OSA -like policies targeted the 
reshoring of products with signi ficant economies of scale or which benefit from a high 
concentration of workers and processes, then such policies might support or accelerate intra- EU/euro area divergence. The policies would therefore have 
implications for the smooth transmission of the s ingle monetary policy across the 
euro area, as the ECB would have to cope with heightened challenges resulting from large, negative, asymmetric supply shocks that are, to some extent, “nurtured” or 
“intended” by the EU.  
A certain degree of “de -globalisatio n” may imply a lower impact of the 
spillovers underpinning a global financial cycle but an amplification of 
domestic shocks.  As discussed in the ECB work stream on globalisation (2021), 
domestic financial cycles have been driven, at least in part, by a global financial 
cycle characterised by strong co- movements in asset prices, gross capital flows and 
leverage. Although this is particularly relevant for emerging and small open 
 
341    The line of reaso ning is that as the world becomes more financially integrated, the pool of savings 
that demands safe assets as a store of value (and insurance) multiplies, while the supply of safe 
assets does not multiply commensurately. Over the past three decades, the s trong growth of EMEs 
coupled with high savings demand has led to rising scarcity of safe assets, which has put downward pressure on equilibrium interest rates ( Bernanke , 2005; Caballero et al. , 2016; Caballero et al.,  2017; 
Del Negro et al.,  2017).  
342    See Comin and Johnson  (2020) and Natal and Stoffels  (2019). From a theoretical perspective, the 
impact of greater trade openness is ambiguous. As discussed in the ECB strategy review ( Work 
stream on globalisation , 2021), in the early phase of globalisation increase d trade integration may 
have accentuated competition between companies, reducing firms’ market power and bolstering productivity. This should have exerted upward pressure on the natural rate. As globalisation matured, 
however, the opposite mechanism could have played out, with a rise in market power putting more 
downward pressure on the natural rate ( Autor et al. , 2020; Gutiérrez and Philippon , 2019). The 
sequence of these opposing effects on productivity has been described by Natal and Stoffels  (2019) 
as the main reason for the hump -shaped pattern shown by long -term real rates (i.e. the rise in rates 
until the 1970s and the subsequent decline).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 157  
 economies,343 the euro area may also be affected at times.344 Owing to the 
dominant  role of the US dollar in the global financial system, the Federal Reserve 
System plays a greater role in driving the global financial cycle than the ECB.345 
These facts could change in a world in which financial openness is reduced.  
Strategic trade dependencies for key products increase vulnerability to some 
of the most recent geopolitical shocks.  In a world in which geopolitics play an 
increasing role, these strategic dependencies have an impact on inflation 
developments including price levels, volatility and relative price movements.  
Shorter production networks can have a bearing on price setting mechanisms. 
Decisions to reshore or shorten/regionalise value chains in response to geopolitical 
risks could alter price levels, along with the price setting behaviour of firms and the 
bargaining power of workers. Localising production could increase demand for factor 
inputs, driving up costs and prices. Depending on how such a process evolves , 
enhanced public support for local firms could also give such firms greater market 
power, facilitating a rise in markups that puts further upwards pressure on prices (see Box 4.1).  
The greening of the economy makes it possible to reduce energy dependencies but requires time and introduces elements that impact inflation, inflation volatility and relative prices within the energy mix.  In the current 
geopolitical context, the twin transitions of greening and digitalising the economy will help reduce dependencies and increase resilience in the long run. However, in the short run they may have implications for inflation and inflation volatility.  
Transitory but long -lasting changes in the price level pose additional 
challenges to the conduct of monetary policy.  If geopolitical shocks or OSA policy 
responses result in a sustained period of higher inflation or price volatility, the ECB 
could find itself exposed to additional policy trade- offs. The conclusions of the ECB’s 
2021 monetary policy strategy review offer a sound policy basis as they clarify the concept of the medium -term ori entation of monetary policy. As stated in European 
Central Bank  (2021d ), the medium -term orientation provides the policy flexibility 
required to assess the origin of shocks and look through temporary shocks that may dissipate of their own accord, thus avoiding unnecessary volatility in activity and 
employment. In particular,  supply shocks can create a temporary trade- off by moving 
inflation and real economic activity in different directions.  
A large part of the cross- country correlation in headline inflation rates is 
accounted for by commodity prices.  At the same time, global factors have played 
a much less important role in driving core inflation, even though persistent and large 
global energy and food price shocks may end up affecting more stable components 
of inflation through indirect and second- round effects. A domestica lly driven greening 
of the economy and more diversified external energy dependence could, potentially, 
 
343  See Rey (2016), Passari and Rey  (2015), Gerko and Rey  (2017) and Mirand a-Agrippino and Rey  
(2020).  
344  Others contest the claim that the “trilemma” has morphed into a “dilemma”, meaning that whenever 
capital is freely mobile, the global financial cycle constrains national monetary policies regardless of 
the exchange rate regim e (Klein and Shambaugh, 2015; Obstfeld et al. , 2019).  
345    See Ca’ Zorzi et al.  (2020), Jarociński  (2020) and Obstfeld  (2020).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 158  
 mitigate exposure to commodity shocks originating in third countries, in particular 
with regard to more integrated markets (e.g. oil markets) and if subs titution is 
effected out of more segmented markets (e.g. natural gas markets). Moreover, 
common EU action, such as an “energy union”,346 could be central to reducing 
unwarranted price increases and volatility.  
Geopolitical factors also influence capital flo ws and the smooth functioning of 
financial market infrastructures, thereby posing risks to financial stability.  The 
euro area is more financially open than other major economies and is also home to a 
number of major investment hubs. As discussed earlier in  this report, it is difficult to 
map financial exposures for a number of reasons. The current overreliance of EU 
market participants on third- country payment and clearing services, with the EU 
authorities having only limited reach in the event of a crisis,  is a potential source of 
financial stability risks. Moreover, potential disruptions to clearing operations, as well as certain CCP clearing risk management decisions, could affect the functioning of 
markets for euro- denominated financial instruments which  are relevant for monetary 
policy implementation. Also, the dominant position of non- EU payment -related 
service providers in intermediating European payment transactions raises concerns 
as to the resilience of EU payment markets, while the activities of non -European “Big 
Tech” companies in EU financial services entails financial stability and operational 
risks.  
Some OSA policies may impact the international status of currencies including 
the euro. Depending on the form they take, OSA policies could impact the 
international role of the euro and, therefore, the transmission of external shocks and 
the degree of monetary policy autonomy. In relation to this, a deeper and more 
complete EMU, including further progress with the capital markets union, could 
strengt hen the international role of the euro.  
It is essential for Member States to pursue sound economic policies if market participants are to continue to view their sovereign debts as safe assets. In 
addition, assets created through common debt issuance, such as those used 
to meet time -limited chall enges, broaden the universe of safe assets 
denominated in euro. Both can have several benefits for OSA. As explained in 
Section 3.3.5, safe assets denominated in euro can buttress financial stability and integration. As common EU debt is considered safe and, therefore, attracts 
favourable financing conditions it is of assistance in the provision of public goods 
directly related to OSA. For example, several OSA policies, such as those 
associated with changes in the energy mix (see Section 2) and the green and digital 
transition (see Box 3.1), or those potentially strengthening European external 
security (see Box 3.6) are likely to imply large- scale investments. Lower financing 
costs imply – all things being equal – favourable deficit and debt dynamics, which 
could support the transmission of monetary policy and price developments in the 
EU/euro area.  
 
346    See Michel  (2022).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 159  
 4.2 Economic and policy uncertainty  
Geopolitically induced shocks, also of a transitory nature, may blur the picture 
for monetary policy by increasing economic uncertainty.  More frequent shocks 
of this nature have the potential to increase output and inflation volatility, which may 
generate persistent dynamics that, even if transitory, would pose a challenge to the 
conduct of monetary policy, its communication and it s transmission.  
Spillovers from economic uncertainty shocks might become more prominent 
and might alter the macroeconomic environment in which central banks 
operate.  A more significant role for geopolitical factors in world economic affairs 
might lead to m ore frequent spikes in global uncertainty. This could have direct 
effects on the EU/euro area when the uncertainty shocks originate in areas/countries with which strong trade and/or financial ties exist. However, indirect effects could 
also arise insofar as conflict and social tensions in areas less economically 
connected to the EU/euro area could generate spillovers through other regions
347 or 
by affecting, for example, migration trends (e.g. the Syrian refugee crisis or migration 
induced by global food cri ses).  
OSA policies enacted in response to geopolitical shocks may themselves 
increase economic policy uncertainty348 and therefore need to be well defined 
and calibrated.  Some OSA policies are of a structural nature insofar as they are 
aimed at changing som e basic feature of the economy (e.g. the energy mix). At the 
same time, climate- change goals also represent one of the EU’s strategic objectives. 
In this case the two goals coincide, albeit with a different time horizon, so longer -
term energy transition pl ans are influenced by significant geopolitical (but more 
transitory) shocks such as the war in Ukraine. The war has led to an acceleration of 
the reduction of dependency on Russian gas, oil and coal. This acceleration in 
meeting the goal of changing the energy mix implies sharper price increases than 
previously expected and possibly warrants changes in the taxonomy of “green 
versus brown” energy sources. Necessary as they may well be, these policy actions 
introduce a higher degree of uncertainty with regard to the future direction of energy 
policy in the EU/euro area with, for example, implications for long- term private 
investments. Beyond energy policy, OSA may also require, in other cases, regulatory 
changes to state aid, industrial policies, investment sc reening and export controls. 
Once again, the horizon of such policies and the interaction between short and long-
term effects should be weighed up appropriately to minimise distortions in the 
smooth functioning of the Single Market and in investment decisi on-making.  
 
 
347    See, for example, Ghirelli et al.  (2021) and the references quoted therein.  
348    Economic policy uncertainty affects economic decisions. See, for example, the seminal work of 
Baker et al.  (2016), Ahir et al.  (2022) and Al-Thaqeb and Algharabali  (2019) and the references 
quoted therein.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 160  
 Box 4.1 The macroeconomic implications of re- orientating global supply chains  
Policymakers around the world are (re)considering the trade- off between efficiency and resilience 
inherent in GVCs. Many have introduced legislation, such as the EU Chips Act or the US Science 
and Chips Act, seeking to encourage the local production of key manufacturing inputs and reduce 
excessive dependencies on external suppliers. Proponents argue that more localised production would provide greater security of supply and would imply lower uncertainty for consumers and businesses.  
Using an extended version of the dynamic general equilibrium Euro Area Global Economy (EAGLE) model (Gomes et al., 2012; Clancy et al., 2016), we analyse the macroeconomic effects of sever al 
types of localisation policies. We show that the macroeconomic implications depend on whether 
localisation policies are unilateral or part of a global shift, and on the extent to which they lead to an 
increase in local firms’ market power. We also demonstrate that a (non- targeted) reorientation of 
global supply chains does not improve resilience against global shocks, and substantially reduces 
resilience against domestic shocks. Finally, we show that fiscal policy, the primary macroeconomic 
stabilisation instrument available to small open economies in a customs and/or currency union, can 
play an important role in mitigating some of the negative side effects of localisation policies.  
First, we examine the implications of euro area exporters permanently reducing their preference for 
imported intermediate inputs and, instead, favouring the use of regionally -produced inputs (i.e. 
reshoring production). Our analysis assumes a partial reshoring, whereby the decrease in 
preferences gradually reduces imported intermediate inputs by 1% of GDP over the long run. This 
relatively limited reshoring is in line with localisation policies focusing on only the most essential 
goods and European policymakers’ stated desire to remain as economically open as possible while boosting strategic autonomy.  
If the euro area pursues reshoring unilaterally and other parts of the world keep their trade 
preferences unchanged, aggregate output falls over the medium term while the economy adjusts 
(see Chart A, panel a, blue line). Increased costs and prices arising from greater demand for local factor inputs result in higher inflation and a real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciation that 
worsens external competitiveness. In the long run, the shift in preferences towards domestic goods  
is sufficient to boost aggregate output.  
If all regions of the world engage in reshoring, the reduction in euro area output is initially larger but 
the adjustment is much faster (see Chart A, panel a, yellow line). This is because costs and prices 
rise a broad and the REER depreciates, despite increased euro area inflation, supporting tradable 
sector production. Importantly, in the likely scenario that reshoring policies lead to a reduction in 
domestic competition and local producers use the resulting increase in their market power to raise markups, output is permanently lower (see Chart A, panel a, red line).  
Next we examine the effects of reorientating supply chains towards “trusted partners”, a policy known as friend- shoring. We model this as a gradual increase in euro area preferences for 
intermediate- good imports from the United States over the long run, which is offset by a reduction in 
preferences for such imports from the rest of the world.  
When friend- shoring is pursued unilaterally, a loss of external competitiveness drags euro area 
aggregate output down for an extended period via the tradable sector (see Chart A, panel b, blue line). When there is reciprocation, whereby the United States increases its preference for imported 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central bank ing perspective  
 161  
 inputs from the euro area, the worsening of competitiveness and the initial output loss is greater but 
less persistent. Friend- shoring is somewhat more beneficial over the medium term if the rest of the 
world retaliates by pursuing similar friend- shoring policies with its allie s. 
A key motivation for reorientating supply chains is to boost economic resilience. We analyse 
whether this is the case by comparing the response of the euro area economy with current trade 
linkages (the status quo) and the euro area economy after (partially) reshoring production against 
regional and global shocks to export firm price markups. These shocks proxy the post -pandemic 
and post -war supply chain disruptions which, at least partly, motivated the increased focus on 
boosting resilience. We find that  reshoring production does not achieve this goal. The reshored 
economy has almost the same sensitivity to global shocks (dashed compared to solid blue line, 
Chart A, panel c), while it is substantially more exposed to regional shocks (dashed compared to 
solid red line, Chart A, panel c). This is in line with smaller economies (as aggregate output is lower 
in a reshored economy it is smaller in terms of share of global output) generally being less resilient 
to shocks.  
Our analysis highlights the fact that l ocalisation policies can worsen external competitiveness via 
increased costs and prices. Individual euro area member countries can mitigate this side effect 
using fiscal policy, which remains a national competency. In particular, a budget -neutral substitut ion 
of imported goods with local tradable goods helps support domestic demand in the short run while 
increasing public investment (and reducing government consumption expenditure), mitigates cost and price rises and boosts external competitiveness in the m edium to long run (see Chart A, panel 
d, yellow line).
349 The combined positive effects of such an approach may even be sufficient to 
counteract an increase in local firms’ market power (see Chart A, panel d, red line).  
While localisation policies are rooted in concerns over and beyond economics, policymakers need  to consider ways to reduce adjustment costs. Given that crowding- out effects are prevalent in our 
analysis, focusing on only the most essential goods would minimise cost and price pressures and 
maintain external competitiveness. While public investment is, potentially, a powerful tool in 
facilitating this transition, increasing the local production of goods for which the euro area lacks a 
comparative advantage could require considerable public support to reach the technological 
frontier. If the technological frontier is not reached, euro area firms could end up using an inferior 
good, which would also be damaging for output. Finally, friend- shoring assumes a continuous 
period of unchanged trade poli cies amongst partners. With many countries seeking to boost the 
local production of key goods, there is the potential for future trade tensions. Policymakers should therefore seek to friend- shore the production of goods to regions that are not potential competitors 
for those same goods.  
 
349    As an example of a small open economy in the euro area, we calibrate our model to Ireland.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective  
 162  
 Chart A  
Impact on aggregate domestic output from selected OSA policies and resilience of reshored 
economies to regional and global shocks  
a) Partial reshoring euro area (1% of GDP)  b) Partial friend -shoring euro area (1% of GDP)  
(percentage deviations from steady state, quarters)  (percentage deviations from steady state, quarters)  
  
c) Resilience to shocks euro area  d) Reshoring in a small open economy  
(percentage  deviations from steady state, quarters)  (percentage deviations from steady state, quarters)  
  
Source: Own calculations, based on simulations in Clancy et al. (2022a, 2022b).  
Notes: Panel a displays the effect on aggregate euro area output of a permanent increase in euro area preferences for regionally -produced inputs for export 
goods, scaled to gradually substitute 1% of GDP of intermediate- goods imports over the long run. For the blue line this policy is implemented unilaterally, 
while for the yellow line it is part of a global shift (i.e. all other regions implement a similar policy). The red line shows what the impact will be if such a partial 
reshoring raises markups due to an increase in euro area tradeable firms’ market power. Panel b displays the effect on aggregate euro area output of 
a permanent increase in euro area preferences for intermediate- goods imports from the United States, scaled to substitute 1% of GDP of intermediate- good 
imports from the rest of the world (RoW). For the blue line this policy is implemented unilaterally, while for the yellow line it is reciprocated by the United States (i.e. the United States increases its preference for imports of intermediate goods from the euro area at the expense of impor ts from the RoW). The red line 
shows the effects of the RoW retaliating by reshoring production equivalent to 1% of GDP. In Panel c, the blue lines show the effects on aggregate euro area 
output of an increase in euro area exporters’ markups. The dashed blue line represents current  trade linkages while the solid blue line represents euro area 
trade linkages after completion of a partial reshoring. The red lines show the effects on aggregate euro area output of an increase in US and RoW exporters’ markups. The dashed red line represents current trade linkages while the solid red line represents euro area trade linkages after completion of a partial reshoring. Panel d displays the effects on Irish aggregate output of unilateral reshoring (blue line), unilateral reshoring coupled with an increase in Irish tradable firms’ markups (red line), and unilateral reshoring coupled with an increase in Irish tradable firms’ markups and counteracting ex ante budget neutral 
fiscal policy measures that reorientate public spending towards domestic tradables and investment (yellow line).  -0.15-0.10-0.050. 000. 050. 10
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40Unilateral
Global
Higher Markups
-0.15-0.10-0.050. 000. 050. 100. 150. 200. 250. 30
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40Unilateral
Reciprocation (United St ates)
Retaliation (rest of world)
-1.4-1.2-1.0-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.20. 0
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40Regional stat us quo
Regi onal r eshor ed
Global st atus quo
Global reshored
-0.3-0.2-0.10. 00. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 6
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 Unilat eral
 Fiscal mitigation
 Higher Markups
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 163  
References  
Adelphi Research (2020), The geopolitics of decarbonisation. 
Aghion, P., Cai, J., Dewatripont, M., Du, L., Harrison, A. and Legros, P. (2015),  
“Industrial policy and competition”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , 
Vol. 7, No 4, October, pp. 1- 32. 
Ahir, H., Bloom, N. and Furceri, D. (2022), “ The world uncertainty index ”, Working 
Paper Series , No 29763, National Bureau of Economic Research, February.  
Aikman, D., Kiley, M., Lee, S.J., Palumbo, M.G. and Warusawitharana, M. (2017), 
“Mapping heat in the US financial system ”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 81, 
August, pp. 36- 64.  
Akcigit, U., Pearce, J.G. and Prato, M. (2020),  “Tapping into talent: Coupling 
education and innovation policies for economic growth”, Working Paper Series , No 
27862, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Albano, A. (2012), “ The brain drain: winners and losers. Socio- economic effects of 
highly skilled migrations on both sending and host countries ”, Sfera Politicii , Vol. 20, 
Issue 4, pp. 83- 90. 
Alcidi, C., Postica, D. and Shamsfakhr, F. (2021), “ Analysis of Developments in EU 
Capital Flows in the Global Context ”, External contributi on, Centre for European 
Policy Studies.  
Alessandria, G., Kaboski, J.P. and Midrigan, V. (2010), “ The great trade collapse of 
2008- 09: An inventory adjustment?” , Working Paper Series , No 16059, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, January.  
Alessandria, G., Kaboski, J.P. and Midrigan, V. (2011), “ US Trade and Inventory 
Dynamics”,  American Econom ic Review , Vol. 101, No 3, May, pp. 303- 07. 
Alicke, K., Barriball, E., Birshan, M., George, K., Krishnan, M., Lund, S., Manyika, J., 
Smit, S., Swan, D. and Woetzel, J. (2020), “ Risk, resilience, and rebalancing in 
global value chains”,  McKinsey Global Institute, August.  
Allianz Research (2020), Global supply chain survey in search of post -COVID -19 
resilience , December.  
Allison, G. (2017), “ The Thucydides trap”, Foreign Policy Magazine, June.  
Alogoskoufis,  S., Giuzio, M., Kostka, T., Levels, A., Molestina Vivar , L. and Wedow , 
M. (2020) , “How could a common safe asset contribute to financial stability and 
financial integration in the banking union?”. Special Feature B in Financial Integration 
and Structure in the Euro Area, European Central Bank Report.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 164  
Alonso, D., Buesa, A., Moreno, C., Párraga, S. and Viani, F. (2021), “ Fiscal policy 
measures adopted since the second wave of the health crisis: euro area, the United 
States and the United Kingdom ”, Occasional Documents, No. 2118, Banco de 
España.  
Alptekin, A. and Levine, P. (2012), “ Milita ry expenditure and economic growth: A 
meta- analysis ”, European Journal of Political Economy , Vol. 28, No 4, December.  
Al-Thaqeb, S. A. and Algharabali, B.G. (2019), “ Economic policy uncertainty: A 
literature review ”, The Journal of Economic Asymmetries , Vol. 20, November.  
Anaya Longaric, P. and Di Casola, P. (2022),  “The internalisation of renminbi: 
regaining strength”, The international role of the euro, ECB, June.  
Anaya Longaric, P. and McQuade, P. (2021), “New insights on the currency 
denomination of official holdings of foreign exchange reserves ”, The international 
role of the euro, ECB, June.  
Andrés, J., Arce, O., and Burriel, P. (2021) , “Market polarization and the Phillips 
curve ”, Bank of Spain Working Paper 2106.  
Andrews, D. and Criscuolo, C. (2013), “ Knowledge -Based Capital, Innovation and 
Resource Allocation”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers , No 1046, 
OECD.  
Andrews, D., Criscuolo, C. and Gal, P. (2015), “ Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion 
and Public Policy: Micro Evidence from OECD Countries ”, OECD Productivity 
Working Papers , No 2, OECD.  
Andrews, D., Nicoletti, G. and Timiliotis, C. (2018), “ Digital technology diffusion: a 
matter of capabilities, incentives or both?”, OECD Economics Department Working 
Papers , No 1476, OECD.  
Anghel, S., Immenkamp, B., Lazarou, E., Saulnier, J.L. and Wilson, A.B.  (2020), “ On 
the path to 'strategic autonomy' - The EU in an evolving geopolitical environment ”, 
European Parliamentary Research Service, September.  
Angrist, N., Cameron- Blake, E., Goldszmidt, R., Hale, T., Hallas, L., Kira, B., 
Majumbar, S., Petherick, A., Phillips, T., Tatlow, H. and Webster, S. (2021), “ A global 
panel database of pandemic policies (Oxford COVID -19 Government Response 
Tracker)”, Nature Human Behaviour , Vol. 5, pp. 529- 538. 
Antràs, P. (2021 ), “De -Globalisation? Global Value Chains in the Post -COVID -19 
Age”, ECB Forum: Central Banks in a Shifting World, November.  
Arriola, C., Kowalski, P. and van Tongeren, F. (2021), “ The Impact of COVID -19 on 
Directions and Structure of International Trade”, Trade Policy Papers , No.252, 
OECD.  
Arpaia, A., Kiss, A., Palvolgyi, B. and Turrini, A. (2016), “ Labour mobility and labour 
market adjustment in the EU ”, IZA Journal of Migration, Vol. 5, No 21, November.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 165  
Arslanalp, S., Eichengreen, B.J. and Simpson -Bell, C. (2022), “ The Stealth Erosion 
of Dollar Dominance: Active Diversifier s and the Rise of Nontraditional Reserve 
Currencies ”, IMF Working Papers , No 58, March.  
Atomico and Slush (2021) , State of the European Tech Report 2021, December.  
Autor, D.,  Dorn , D., Katz , L.F., Patterson, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2020), “ The Fall of 
the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms ”, The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics , Vol. 135, Issue 2, May, pp. 645- 709. 
Badinger, H. and Nitsch, V. (eds.) (2016), “ Routledge Handbook of the Economics of 
European Integration”, Routledge International Handbooks , December.  
Bailey, M.A., Strezhnev, A., Voeten, E. (2017), “ Estimating dynamic state preferences 
from United Nations voting data”, Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 61(2), pp. 430-
456. 
Baisakova, N. and Kleinhans, J.P. (2020), “ The global semiconductor value chain: A 
technology primer for policymakers ”, Policy Brief , Stift ung Neue Verantwortung, 
October.  
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N. and Davis, S.J. (2016), “ Measuring economic policy 
uncertainty ”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 131(4), pp. 1593- 1636.   
Baldwin R. and Freeman, R. (2021), “ Risks and global supply chains: What we know 
and what we need to know ”, Working Paper Series , No 29444, National Bureau of 
Economic Research.  
Baldwin, R. and Grozoubinski, D. (2022), “ Strengthening the multilateral trading 
system: The ‘WTO rising’ imperative ”, in Ing, L.Y. and Rodrik, D. (eds.), New Normal, 
New Technology, New Financing, Jakarta: ERIA and IEA, pp.141- 152.  
Bańkowski, K., Bouabdallah, O., Domingues Semeano, J., Dorrucci, E., Freier, M., Jacquinot, P., Modery, W., Rodríguez -Vives, M., Valenta, V. and Zorell, N, (2022), 
“The economic impact of Next Generation EU: a euro area perspective”, Occasional 
Paper Series , No 291, ECB.  
Baqaee, D., Landais, C., Martin, P. and Moll, B. (2022), “ The Economic 
Consequences of a Stop of Energy Imports from Russia”, French Council of Economic Advisors.  
Barrett, P., Appendino, M., de Leon Miranda, J. and Nguyen, K. (2020), “ Measuring 
social unrest using media reports ”, IMF Working Papers , No 129, July.  
Barrios, S. Holger, G. and Strobl, E. (2005). " Foreign direct investment, competition 
and industrial development in the host country ", European Economic Review , vol. 
49(7), pp. 1761- 1784.  
Barro, R.J. and Lee, J.W. (2005), “ IMF programs: who is chosen and what are the 
effects?”, Journal of Monetary Economics , Vol. 52 (7), pp.  1245- 1269.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 166  
Beghin, J. C. and Li, Y., (2012), “ A meta -analysis of estimates of the impact of 
technical barriers to trade”, Journal of Policy Modeling, Vol. 34(3), pp. 497- 511. 
Beine, M., Docquier, F. and Rapoport, H. (2008), “ Brain drain and human capital 
formation in developing countries: Winners and losers ”, The Economic Journal , Vol. 
118, No 528, pp. 631–652.  
Becker, J. and Dunne, J.P. (2021), “ Military Spending Composition and Economic 
Growth ”, Defence and Peace Ec onomics . 
Bekkers, E. and Góes, C. (2022), “ The impact of geopolitical conflicts on trade, 
growth, and innovation: An illustrative simulation study ”, VoxEU, 29 March. 
Belotti, F., Borin, A. and Mancini, M. (2021), “ icio: Economic analysis with 
intercountry input -output tables ”, The Stata Journal , Vol. 21 (3), pp. 708- 755. 
Bénassy -Quéré, A.,  Brunnermeier , M., Enderlein, H., Farhi , E., Fr atzscher , M., Fuest, 
C., Gourinchas , P.O., Martin, P., Pisani , F., Rey , H., Véron , N., Weder di Mauro, B. 
and Zettelmeyer , J. (2018), “ Policy Insight 91: Reconciling risk sharing with market 
discipline: A  constructive approach to euro area reform ”, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research. 
Bencivelli, L., Conteduca F. P. and Pisicoli, B. (2019), “A map of cross -border M&A in 
the EU”, mimeo, Banca d'Italia.  
Bencivelli, L. and Pisicoli, B. (2022), “ Foreign investors and target firms’ financial 
structure”, International Economics , Vol. 169, pp. 230-2 51. 
van Bergeijk, Peter A.G. (2019),  “Deglobalization 2.0 Trade and Openness During 
the Great Depression and the Great Recession” , Edward Elgar Publishing, 
Cheltenham.  
Berlin Social Science Center (2021), Power Shifts, International Institutions and 
Inter-Institutional Strategies . 
Bernanke, B.S. (2005), “ The global saving glut and the U.S. current account 
deficit ”, Speech 77, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  
Berthou, A . and Stumpner, S. (2022), “ Trade under lockdown”, Working Papers , No 
867, Banque de France.  
Beverelli, C., Keck, A., Larch, M. and Yoto, Y. (2018). " Institutions, Trade and 
Development: A Quantitative Analysis ", Working Paper Series , No, 6920, CESifo.  
Bini Smaghi, L. (2006), “ Powerless Europe: Why is the Euro Area Still a Political 
Dwarf? ”, International Finance, Vol. 9, (2), pp. 261- 279. 
Biondo, A.E., Monteleone, S., Skonieczny, G. and Torrisi, B. (2012), “ The propensity 
to return: Theory and evidence for the Italian brain drain”, Economics Letters , Vol. 
115, No 3, pp. 359- 362. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 167  
Bircan, Ç. (2019), " Ownership Structure and Productivity of Multinationals " Journal of 
International Economics , vol. 116(C), pp.  125-143. 
Blázquez, L., Díaz -Mora, C., and González -Díaz, B. (2022), “ Slowbalisation or a 
“New” type of GVC participation? The role of digital services ” Journal of Industrial 
and Business Economics , published online 16 December 2022.  
Bletzinger, T., Greif, W. and Schwaab, B. (2022), “ Can EU bonds serve as euro-
denominated safe assets?”, Working Paper Series , No 2712, ECB.  
Blinder, A.S. (2007), “ Offshoring: Big deal, or business as usual?”, Working 
Papers  149, Princeton University, Department of Economics, Center for Economic 
Policy Studies.  
Blockmans, S. (2020), “ Why the EU needs a geopolitical Commission”, Centre for 
European Policy Studies . 
Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J. (2012), “ Americans do IT better: US 
Multinationals and the Productivity Mi racle ”, American Economic Review , Vol. 102, 
No 1, pp.167- 201. 
Bodewig, C. and Ridao- Cano, C. (2018), “ Growing United: Upgrading Europe’s 
Convergence Machine”, World Bank Report on the European Union, World Bank, 
Washington, DC.  
Boehm, C.E., Levchenko, A.A. and Pandalai -Nayar, N. (2020), “ The long and short 
(run) of trade elasticities ”, Working Paper Series , No 27064, National Bureau of 
Economic Research.  
Böhme, M.H. and Glaser, T. (2014), “ Migration experience, aspirations and the brain 
drain: Theory and empirical evidence”, Working Papers in Economics and Management , Vol. 14, Department of Business Administration and Economics, 
Bielefeld University.  
Bonadio, B., Huo, Z., Levchenko, A.A. and Pandalai -Nayar, N. (2021), “ Global supply 
chains in the pandemic ”, Journal of International Economics , Vol. 133, No 103534.  
Bontadini, F., Meliciani, V., Savona, M. and Wirkierman, A. L. (2022). “Nearshoring 
and Farsharing in Europe within the Global Economy”, In EconPol Forum , Vol. 23, 
No 5, pp. 37- 42. 
Boranova V., Huidrom, R., Ozturk, E.O., Stepanyan, A., Topalova, P. and Zhang, S. (2022), “ Cars in Europe: Supply chains and spillovers during COVID -19 times ”, IMF 
Working Papers , No 2022/6, International Monetary Fund.  
Borin, A. and Mancini, M. (2019), “ Measuring What Matters in Global Value Chains 
and Value- Added Trade”, Policy Research Working Paper , No 8804, World Bank.  
Borin, A., Mancini, M. and Taglioni, D. (2021), “ Measuring exposure to risk in global 
value chains ”, Policy Research Working Paper, No 9785, World Bank. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 168  
Borin, A., Conteduca, F.P. and Mancini, M. (2022a), “ The impact of the war on 
Russian imports: a synthetic control method approach”, VoxEU.  
Borin, A., Conteduca, F.P., Di Stefano, E., Gunnella, V., Mancini, M. and Panon, L. 
(2022b), “ Quantitative assessment of the economic impact of the trade disruptions 
following the Russian invasion of Ukraine”, Occasional Papers , No 700, Banca 
d’Italia.  
Borin, A., Mancini,  M. and Taglioni, D. (2022c), “ Integration in global value chains 
might not increase exposure to risk after all ”, VoxEU.  
Borrallo, F.,  Cuadro- Sáez, L. and Pérez, J.J. (2022), “ Rising food commodity prices 
and their pass -through to euro area consumer prices ”, Economic Bulletin, No 3/2022, 
Banco de España.  
Bossavie, L., Garrote- Sánchez , D., Makovec, M.  and Özden, C. (2022), “ Skilled 
Migration: A Sign of Europe's Divide or Integration?”, World Bank Group. 
Washington, D.C.  
Boulanger, P., Philippidis, G. and Urban, K. (2017), “Assesing potential coupling 
factors of European decoupled payments with the Modular Agricultural GeNeral 
Equilibrium Tool (MAGNET)”, JRC Research Reports 104276, Joint Reserch 
Centre…  
Bown, C.P. (2020), “ How the United States marched the semiconductor industry into 
its trade war with China”, Working Papers , No 20- 16, Peterson Institute for 
International Economics.  
Boz, E., Casas, C., Georgiadis, G., Gopinath, G., Le Mezo, H., Mehl, A. and Nguyen, 
T. (2020), “ Patterns in Invoicing Currency in Global Trade”, IMF Working Papers , No 
2020/126, International Monetary Fund.  
Braguinsky, S., Ohyama, A., Okazaki, T. and Syverson, C. (2015).  "Acquisitions, 
Productivity, and Profitability: Evidence from the Japanese Cotton Spinning Industry ." American Economic Review , Vol. 105 (7), pp. 2086- 2119  
Brown J.R., Fazzari, S.M. and Petersen, B.C. (2009), “ Financing Innovation and 
Growth: Cash Flow, External Equity, and the 1990s R&D Boom ”, The Journal of 
Finance, Vol. 64(1), pp. 151- 185. 
Bruegel (2021), “ EU debt vs national debts: friends or foes?”.  
Brunnermeier, M.K., James, H. and Landau, J.P. (2022), “ Sanctions and the 
international monetary system ”, VoxEU, 5 April.  
Business Continuity Institute (2021), “ Supply Chain Resilience Report 2021”.  
Buysse, K. and Essers, D. (2022), “ Should we fear China’s brave new digital world?”, 
Economic Review,  Article 5, Nationale Bank van Belgi ë/Banque Nationale de 
Belgique. 
 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 169  
Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E. and Gourinchas, P.O. (2016), “ Safe Asset Scarcity and 
Aggregate Demand”, American Economic Review , Vol. 106, No 5, pp. 513-518.  
Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E. and Gourinchas, P.O. (2017), “ The Safe Assets Shortage 
Conundrum ”, Journal of Economic Perspectives , Vol. 31(3), pp. 29- 46. 
Caldara, D. and Iacoviello, M. (2022), “ Measuring Geopolitical Risk ”, American 
Economic Review , Vol. 112, No 4, pp. 1194- 1225.  
Caliendo, L. and Parro, F. (2015), “ Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of 
NAFTA ”, The Review of Economic Studies , Vol. 82, Issue 1, pp. 1- 44. 
Campos R., Estefanía- Flores, J., Furceri, D. and Timini, J. (2022), “Trade 
Fragmentation”, Working Papers , Banco de España, forthcoming.  
Carvalho, V.M. and Tahbaz -Salehi, A. (2019), “ Production Networks: A Primer ”, 
Annual Review of Economics , Vol. 11(1), pp. 635- 663. 
Caselli, F, Koren,  M., Lisicky, M. and Tenreyro, S. (2020), “ Diversification Through 
Trade ”, The Quarterly  Journal  of Economics , Vol. 135 ( 1), pp. 449– 502 
Ca’ Zorzi, M., Dedola, L., Georgiadis, G., Jarociński, M., Stracca, L. and Strasser, G. 
(2020), “ Monetary Policy and its Transmission in a Globalised World”, Working Paper 
Series , No 2407, ECB. 
CEPII (2021), BACI database, 2021 edition.  
Chinn, M. and Frankel, J.F. (2007), “ Will the Euro eventually surpass the Dollar as 
leading international reserve currency?”, in Clarida, R.H. (ed.), G7 current account 
imbalances , The University of Chicago Press.  
Chiţu, L., Eichengreen, B. and Mehl, A. (2019), “ Mars or Mercury? The geopolitics of 
international currency choice ”, Economic Policy, Vol. 34(98), April, pp. 315- 363. 
Ciani, A. and Nardo, M. (2022), “ The position of the EU in the semiconductor value 
chain: Evidence on trade, foreign acquisitions, and ownership”, Working Papers in 
Economics and Finance, No 2022/3, Joint Research Centre, A pril. 
Ciner, C. (2011), “ Commodity prices and inflation: Testing in the frequency domain”, 
Research in International Business and Finance, Vol. 25, No 3, September, pp. 229-237. 
Cioffi M., P. Rizza, M. Romanelli and P. Tommasino (2019), “ Outline of a redistribution-
free debt redemption fund for the euro area”, Bank of Italy, Occasional Papers No. 
479. 
Cladi, L. (2022), “ Persevering with bandwagoning, not hedging: why European 
security co operation still conforms to realism ”, Defence Studies , Vol. 22, Issue 4, pp. 
624-643. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 170  
Clancy, D., Jacquinot, P. and Lozej, M. (2016), “ Government expenditure 
composition and fiscal policy spillovers in small open economies within a monetary 
union”, Journal of Macroeconomics , Vol. 48, Issue C, pp. 305- 326. 
Clancy, D., Smith, D. and Valenta, V. (2022a), “The macroeconomic effects of global 
supply chain r eorientation”, Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper , 
forthcoming.  
Clancy, D., Smith, D. and Valenta, V. (2022b), “Reshoring production in small open 
economies”, Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper , forthcoming.  
Codogno, L. and van den Noord, P. (2019), “ The rationale for a safe asset and fiscal 
capacity for the Eurozone”, LSE ‘Europe in question’ Discussion Paper Series , No 
144/2019, London School of Economics.  
Cœuré, B. (2018), “Asserting Europe’s leadership”, panel remarks at Les rencontres 
économiques d’Aix -en-Provence, 8 July.  
Cœu ré, B. (2019), “ The euro’s global role in a changing world: a monetary policy 
perspective”, speech at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 15 
February.   
Comin, D.A. and Johnson, R.C. (2020), “ Offshoring and inflation”, Working Paper 
Series , No 27957, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Conesa, M. and Timini, J. (2019),  “Chinese exports and non- tariff measures: testing 
for heterogeneous effects at the product level ”, Journal of Economic Integration, Vol. 
34(2), June, pp. 327- 345. 
Coppens, B., Minne, G., Piton, C. and Warisse, C. (2021), “ The Belgian economy in 
the wake of the COVID -19 shock ”, Economic Review , Nationale Bank van 
Belgi ë/Banque Nationale de Belgique, September.  
Coppola, A., Maggiori, M., Neiman, B. and Schreger, J. (2021), “ Redrawing the Map 
of Global Capital Flows: The Role of Cross -Border Financing and Tax Havens ”, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 136(3), Oxford University Press, pp 1499- 1556.  
Council of the European Union (2013), “ Conclusions 19- 20 December 2013”, EUCO 
2017/13.  
Council of the European Union (2016a), “ Council conclusions on implementing the 
EU Global Strategy in the area of Security and Defence - Council conclusions”, 14 
November.  
Council of the European Union (2016b), “ Council conclusions on the Global Strategy 
on the European Union’s Foreign and Security Policy – Annex ”, 17 October.  
Council of the European Union (2020), “ A recovery advancing the transition towards 
a more dynamic, resilient and competitive European industry – Council Conclusions ”, 
16 November.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 171  
Council of the European Union (2021), “ Strategic Autonomy, Strategic Choices ”, 
Issues Paper , Analysis and Research Team, 5 February.  
de Jong, E. (2020), “ Semiconductor winners: European companies with strong 
positions ”, Edison Investment Research, 16 August.  
D'Aguanno, L., Davies, O., Dogan, A., Freeman, R., Lloyd, S., Reinhardt, D., Sajedi, 
R. and Zymek, R. (2021), “ Global value cha ins, volatility and safe openness: Is trade 
a double- edged sword? ”, Financial Stability Paper,  No 46, Bank of England, 
January.  
Darvas, Z. (2019), “ Global interpersonal income inequality decline: The role of China 
and India”, World Development , Vol. 121, September, pp. 16- 32.  
De Backer,  K., De Stefano, T. and Moussiegt, L. (2017), “ Determinants of digital 
technology use by companies ”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy 
Papers , No 40, OECD.  
De Guindos, L. (2021), “ Banking union: achievements and challenges ”, speech at 
the High- level conference on “Strengthening the EU’s bank crisis management and 
deposit insurance fram ework: for a more resilient and efficient banking union” 
organised by the European Commission, 18 March.  
De La Bruyère, E. and Picarsic, N. (2020), “ Two Markets, Two Resources: 
Documenting China’s Engagement in Africa”, Horizon Advisory.  
Del Negro, M., Giannone, D., Giannoni, M. and Tambalotti, A. (2017), “ Safety, 
liquidity, and the natural rate of interest ”, BPEA Conference Drafts , 23-24 March, 
2017.  
Deane, J.P., Ó Ciaráin, M. and Ó Gallachóir, B.P (2017), “ An integrated gas and 
electricity model of the EU energy system to examine supply interruptions ”, Applied 
Energy , Vol. 193, pp. 479- 490. 
Demertzis, M., Domínguez -Jiménez, M. and Guetta- Jeanrenaud, L. (2021), “Europe 
should not neglect its capital markets union”, Bruegel Policy Contribution, N o 13/21, 
June. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), “ The role of the disruption of Chinese supply chains 
in production slumps in the United States and the EU in spring 2020”, Monthly 
Report , October, pp. 52- 54. 
DIHK (2022a), “ Entspannung in weite Ferne gerückt: DIHK -Lieferkettenbericht 
Jahresbeginn 2022”.  
DIHK (2022b), “ Auswirkungen der russischen Invasion in der Ukraine auf die 
deutsche Wirtschaft – Auswertung einer Unternehmensbefragung der IHK -
Organisation im März 2022”.  
Di Iasio , V. and Wahba, J. (2021), “ Natives’ Attitudes and Immigration Flows to 
Europe”, QuantMig Project Deliverable D3.3, University of Southampton.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 172  
Di Nino, V., Habib, M.M. and Schmitz, M. (2020), “ Multinational enterprises, financial 
centres and their implications for external imbalances; a euro area perspective”, 
Economic Bulletin , Issue 2/2020, ECB.  
Di Stefano, E. (2021), “ COVID -19 and global value chains: the ongoing debate”,  
Occasional Papers , No 618, Banca d’Italia.  
Di Stefano, E., Giovannetti, G., Mancini, M., Marvasi, E. and Vannelli, G. (2022), 
“Resh oring and plant closures in COVID -19 times: evidence from Italian MNEs ”, 
International Economics . 
Diakonova, M., Molina, L., Mueller, H., Pérez, J.J. and Rauh, C. (2022a), “ The 
information content of conflict, social unrest and policy uncertainty measures for 
macroeconomic forecasting”, Working Paper , No 2232, Banco de España.  
Diakonova, M., Ghirelli, C., Molina, L. and Pérez, J.J. (2022b).  “The economic impact 
of conflict -related and policy uncertainty shocks: the case of Russia”, Working Paper , 
No 2242, Banco de España.  Revised version forthcoming in International 
Economics . 
Dooley, M., Folkerts -Landau, D. and Garber, P.M. (2022), “ Seizures of foreign 
exchange res erves will not weaken the dollar’s role as dominant reserve currency ”, 
VoxEU, 12 May.  
Dreher, A. and Jensen, N.M. (2007), “ Independent actor or agent? An empirical 
analysis of the impact of US interests on International Monetary Fund conditions ”, 
Journal of Law & Economics , Vol. 50, No 1, pp. 105- 124. 
Dreher,  A., Sturm, J.E.  and Vreeland, J.R. (2009). “Global horse trading: IMF loans 
for votes in the United Nations Security Council ”, European Economic Review,  Vol. 
53, Issue 7, pp.  742- 757. 
Dufouleur, M., Gossé, J.B., Hermet, É. and Mourjane, A. (2020), “ Developing the 
Capital Markets Union to mobilise savings and stimulate investment in Europe”, Banque de France Bulletin, No 231/3, Banque de France.  
Dunne, J. and Tian, N. (2016), “ Military expenditure and economic growth, 1960–
2014”, The Economics of Peace and Security Journal , Vol. 11, No 2, pp. 50- 56. 
Eichengreen, B. (2013), “ Number one country, number one currency? ”, World 
Economy , Vol. 36(4), pp. 363- 374. 
Eichengreen, B. (2021), “ Will Central Bank Digital Currencies Doom Dollar 
Dominance?”, Project Syndicate, 9 August.  
Eichengreen, B. (2022), “ Ukraine war accelerates the stealth erosion of dollar 
dominance”, Financial Ti mes, 28 March.  
Elfving, A., Nilsson, E. and Nordström, H. (2021), “ Impact of the coronavirus 
pandemic on the international supply chain of Swedish firms and measures to reduce vulnerability: a survey in collaboration with the federation of Swedish 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 173  
enterprise ”, Working Paper,  No 2021/46, RSC: Global Governance Programme- 442, 
European University Institute.  
Enria, A. (2022), “ Welcome address ”, speech by Andrea Enria, Chair of the 
Supervisory Board of the ECB, at the SRB and ECB Joint Conference “The test of 
time: banking union a decade on”, Brussels, 23 June 2022.  
ESMA (2020), “ Report on Trends, Risks and Vulnerabilities ”, No 1. 
ESMA (2021), “ ESMA concludes Tier 2 CCP assessment under Article 25(2c) of 
EMIR ”, No ESMA 91- 372-1945, 17 December . 
Espitia A., Mattoo, A., Rocha, N., Ruta, M. and Winkler, D. (2022), “ Pandemic trade: 
COVID -19, remote work and global value chains ”, The World Economy , Vol. 45, 
Issue 2, pp. 561- 589. 
Estefanía- Flores J., Furceri, D., Hannan, S.A., Ostry, J.D. and Rose, A.K. (2022a), “ A 
Measurement of Aggregate Trade Restrictions and their Economic Effects ”, IMF 
Working Papers , No 2022/001, IMF.  
Eurofound (2021), “ Tackling labour shortages in EU Member States ”, Publications 
Office of the European Union, Luxembourg.  
European Banking Authority ( 2019), “ Report on the Impact of Fintech on Payment 
Institutions’ and E -Money Institutions Business Models ”, July.  
European Central Bank  (2019, “ Card payments in Europe”, April.  
European Central Bank (2020), “ Report on a digital euro”, October 2020.  
European Central Bank (2021a), Economic Bulletin , Issue 4.  
European Central Bank (2021b), “ The Eurosystem’s retail payments strat egy”, May.  
European Central Bank (2021c), “ The international role of the euro”, June.  
European Central Bank (2021d ), “An overview of the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy ”, September.  
European Central Bank (2022a), “Financial Integration and Structure in the Euro 
Area ”, ECB Committee on Financial Integration, April.  
European Central Bank (2022b), “ Assessing the resilience of the euro area banking 
sector in light of the Russia- Ukraine war ”, May.  
European Central Bank ( 2022c ), “The international role of the euro”, June.  
European Central Bank (2022d ), “Opinion of the ECB on a proposal for a regulation 
on harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data (Data Act) ”, CON/2022/30).  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 174  
European Commission (2018a ), “Proposal for a Regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Defence Fund”,  
COM/2018/476 final – 2018/0254 (COD).  
European Commission (2018b ), “Employment and Social Developments in Europe – 
Annual review 2018”, Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs and 
Inclusion.  
European Commission (2018c ), “Study on the movement of skilled labour: Final 
report”, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg.  
European Commission (2020a), “ Communication - Europe's moment: Repair and 
Prepare for the Next Generation”, COM/2020/456 final.  
European Commission (2020b), “ Communication – A New Industrial Strategy for 
Europe ”, COM/2020/102 final.  
European Commission (2020c), “ Proposal for a Regulation on a Single Market for 
Digital Services (Digital Services Act) and amending Directive 2000/31/EC ”, 
COM/2020/825 final.  
European Commission (2020d ), “Proposal for a Regulation on contestable and fair 
markets in the digital sector (Digital Markets Act) ”, COM/2020/842 final.  
European Commission (2020e ), “Study on the EU's list of critical raw materials 
(2020): final report ”, Directorate General for Internal Market, Industry, 
Entrepreneurship and SMEs, Publications Office.  
European Commission (2020f), “ Study on the EU's list of critical raw materials 
(2020): critical raw materials factsheets ”, Directorate General for Internal Market, 
Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs, Publications Office.  
European Commission (2020g ), “Critical raw materials for strategic technologies and 
sectors in the EU: a foresight study ”, Publications Office, Directorate General for 
Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs.  
European Commission (2020h ), “The Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) ”, 
Directorate General Communications Networks, Content & Technology.  
European Commission (2020i), “ Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions Updating the 2020 New Industrial Strategy: 
Building a stronger  Single Market for Europe's recovery ”, COM/2021/350 final. 
European Commission (2020j ), “Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE  COUNCIL establishing a Recovery and Resilience 
Facility ”, COM/2020/408 final.  
European Commission (2020k ), “Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path 
towards greater Security and Sustainability ”, COM/2020/474.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 175  
European Commission (2020l ), “Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions on a Retail Payments Strategy for the EU ”, 
COM/2 020/592 final.  
European Commission (2020m ), “Financial stability: Commission adopts time- limited 
decision giving market participants the time needed to reduce exposure to UK 
central counterparties (CCPs) ”, press release, 21 September 2020.  
European Commission (2020n), “Proposal for a Regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council on Markets in Crypto- assets and amending Directive 
(EU) 2019/1937”,  COM/2020/593 final.  
European Commission (2020o), “Shaping Europe's digital future”, 19 February.  
European Commission (2020p), “A European strategy for data”, COM/2020/66 final.  
European Commissi on (2020q), “Regulation on data governance – Questions and 
Answers ”, 25 November.  
European Commission (2020r ), “Proposal for a Regulation on European data 
governance (Data Governance Act) ”, COM/2020/767 final.  
European Commission (2020s ), “Circular economy action plan: for a cleaner and 
more competitive Europe”, Publications Office, Directorate General for 
Communication.  
European Commission (2021a), “ Temporary framework for State Aid measures to 
support the economy in the current COVID -19 outbreak ”, Communication from the 
Commission.  
European Commission (2021b), “ Trade Policy Review – An Open, Sustainabl e and 
Assertive Trade Policy ”, Communication from the Commission, COM/2021/66 final, 
18 February.  
European Commission (2021c), “ Updating the 2020 New Industrial Strategy: Buil ding 
a stronger Single Market for Europe’s recovery ”, Communication from the 
Commission, COM/2021/350 final, 5 May.  
European Commission (2021d), “ Strategic dependencies and capacities ”, 
Commission Staff Working Document , SWD/2021/352.  
European Commission (2021e), “ Commission Notice Guide on Articles 34- 36 of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) ”, C/2021/1457.  
European Commission (2021f), “ Proposal for a regulation to the European 
Parliament and to the Council on foreign subsidies distorting the internal market ”, 
COM/2021/223 final, 5 May.  
European Commiss ion (2021g), “ Proposal for a Commission to the European 
Parliament and of the Council establishing a carbon border adjustment mechanism ”, 
COM/2021/564 final.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 176  
European Com mission (2021h ), “Commissioner McGuinness announces proposed 
way forward for central clearing”, statement, 10 November.  
European Commission (2021i), “ Communication –  The European economic and 
financial system: fostering openness, strength and resilience”, COM/2021/32 final, 
19 January.  
European Commission (2021j ), “2030 Digital Compass: the European way for the 
Digital Decade”, Communication from the Commission, COM/2021/118 final, 9 
September.  
European Commission (2021k ), “The next generation of own resources for the EU 
Budget ”, Commission Communication, COM(2021) 566, 22 December.  
European Commission (2022a), “ Economic power shifts ”, Knowledge for Policy , 
Competence Centre on Fore sight, 13 February.  
European Commission (2022b), “ Temporary Crisis Framework for State Aid 
measures to support the economy following the aggression against Ukraine by Russia ”, 2022/C 131 I/01, 23 February.  
European Commission (2022c ), “EU strategic dependencies and capacities: second 
stage of in- depth reviews ”, 21 February.  
European Commission ( 2022d), “ A Chips Act for Europe”, Commission 
Communication, COM/2022/45 final, 8 February.  
European Commission (2022e), “ An EU Strategy on standardisation - setting global 
standards in support of a resilient, green and digital EU single market ”, press 
release, COM/2022/31 final.  
European Commission (2022f), “ Proposal for a Regulation amending Regulation 
(EU) No 1025/2012 as regards the decisions of European standardisation 
organisations concerning European standards and European s tandardisation 
deliverables ”, COM/2022/32 final.   
European Commission (2022g), “ New approach to enable global leadership of EU 
standards promoting values and a resilient, green and digital Single Market ”, press 
release, 2 February.  
European Commission (2022h), “ Proposal for a Regulation on harmonized rules on 
fair access to and use of data (Data Act) ”, COM/2022/68 final.  
European External Action Service (2016), Shared Vision, Common Action: A 
Stronger Europe - A Global Strategy for the European Union’s F oreign And Security 
Policy , June.  
European Parliament and Council (2019), “ Regulation (EU) 2019/452 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for the screening 
of foreign direct investment s into the Union”, 19 March.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 177  
European Systemic Risk Board (2020) , Systemic cyber risk, February.  
European Systemic Risk Board (2021), ESRB response to ESMA’s consultation on 
determining the degree of systemic importance of UK CCPs , December.  
European Systemic Risk Board ( 2022) , Mitigating systemic cyber risk, January.  
Eurosystem (2021), Reply to the Communication from the European Commission 
‘The EU economy after COVID -19: implications for economic governance’ of 19 
October 2021.  
Farhi, E. and Maggiori, M. ( 2018), “ A Model of the International Monetary System ”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 133 (1), pp. 295- 355. 
Farhi, E. (2019), “ Toward a Multipolar System ”, IMF Finance & Development Blog, 
June.  
Farrell, H. and Newman, A.L. (2019), “ Weaponized interdependence: How global 
economic networks shape state coercion”, International Security , Vol. 44, No 1, pp. 
42-79.  
Fasani, F. and Mazza, J.  (2020),  “A Vulnerable Workforce: Migrant Workers in the 
COVID -19 Pandemic ”, European website on Integration, May.  
Felbermayr, G. (2020), “ The WTO needs a Plan B ”, Global Solutions Journal , Issue 
5, April, pp. 67- 71. 
Felbermayr, G., García- Herrero, A., Langhammer, R., Liu, W.H.,. Poitiers, N., 
Sandkamp, A., Wolff, G. and Xu, J. (2020), “ EU-China trade and investment relations 
in challenging times ”, Report for the European Parliament . 
Ferrari F. (2022), “ Inventories, Demand Shocks Propagation and Amplification in 
Supply Chains ”, mimeo . 
Ferrari, M., Mehl, A. and Stracca, L. (2022), “ Central bank digital currency in an open 
economy ,” Journal of Monetary Economics , Elsevier, vol. 127(C), pages 54- 68. 
Ferrari, M., Mehl, A., Panetta, F., and Van Robays, I. (2021), The international 
dimension of central bank digital currencies: Open research questions , VoxEU, 
CEPR .  
Fillat, J.L. and Garetto, S.  (2015), “ Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production”, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 130, Issue 4, pp. 2027- 2073.  
Financial Stability Board (2019), “ Big Tech in finance: market developments and 
financial stability implications ”, December.  
Flaaen, A. and Pierce, J. (2019), “ Disentangling the effects of the 2018- 2019 tariffs 
on a globally connected U.S. manufacturing sector ”, Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series, No 2019- 086, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 178  
Fontagné, L., Guimbard, H. and Orefice, G. (2022), “ Tariff -based product -level trade 
elasticities”, Journal of International Economics , Vol. 137.  
Freier, M., Grynberg, C., O'Connell, M., Rodríguez -Vives, M. and Zorell, N. (2022), 
“Next Generation EU: a euro area perspective”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1, ECB.  
Frey, R. and Goldbach, S. (2021), “ Benefits of internationalisation for acquirers and 
targets – but unevenly distributed”, Discussion Paper , No 33/2021, Deutsche 
Bundesbank.  
Gal, P., Nicoletti, G., Renault, T., Sorbe, S. and Timiliotis, C. (2019), “ Digitalisation 
and productivity: In search of the holy grail – Firm -level empirical evidence from EU 
countries ”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers , No 1533, OECD.  
Gelpern, A., Horn, S., Morris, S., Parks, B. and Trebesch, C. (2021), “ How China 
Lends: A Rare Look into 100 Debt Contracts with Foreign Governments ”, Working 
Papers , No 21- 7, Peterson Institute for International Economics.  
Geranmayeh, E. and Lafont Rapnouil, M. (2019), Meeting the challenge of 
secondary sanctions , European Council of Foreign Relations, mimeo.  
German Council of Economic  Experts (2019), “ Industrial Policy: Structural change as 
an opportunity ”, Annual Report 2019/20: Dealing with Structural Change, pp. 140-
194. 
Gerko, E. and Rey, H. (2017), “ Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital ”, Journal of 
the European Economic Association, Vol. 15 (), pp. 721- 745. 
Gërmenji, E. and Milo, L. (2011), “ Migration of the skilled from Albania: Brain drain or 
brain gain? ”, Journal of Balkan and Near Eastern Studies , Vol. 13(3), pp. 339- 356. 
Ghirelli, C., Pérez, J.J. and Urtasun, A. (2021), “ The spillover effects of economic 
policy uncertainty in Latin America on the Spanish economy ”, Latin American Journal 
of Central Banking, Vol. 2, Issue 2, June. 
Giamello, G. and Mardell, J. (2021), “ COSCO takes stake in Hamburg Port termi nal 
”, Mercator Institute for China Studies . 
Giovannetti, G., Mancini, M., Marvasi, E. and Vannelli, G. (2020), “ The role of global 
value chains in the pandemic: impact on Italian firms ”, Rivista di Politica Economica, 
2/2020 December.  
Global Trade Alert (2022), GTA database.  
Goldman Sachs (2022), “ Strengthening Supply Chain Resilience: Reshoring, 
Diversification, and Inventory Overstocking”, US Economic Analyst, 27 March.  
Gohin, A. and Zheng, Y.  (2020), “ Reforming the European Common Agricultural 
Policy: From price & income support to risk management ”, Journal of Policy 
Modeling, vol. 42, issue 3, pp. 712- 727. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 179  
Goldin, I., Koutroumpis, P., Lafond, F. and Winkler, J. (2020), “ Why is Productivity 
Slowing Down?”, Oxford Martin Working Paper Series on Technological and 
Economic Change, No 2020- 1. 
Golec, P. and Perotti, E. (2017), “ Safe assets: a review ”, Working Paper Series , No 
2035, ECB, March.  
Goldberg, L. S. and Tille, C. (2009), “ Micro, Macro, and Strategic Forces in 
International Trade Invoicing ", Discussion Paper , No.  7534, CEPR. 
Gomes, S., Jacquinot, P. and Pisani, M. (2012), “ The EAGLE: A model for policy 
analysis of macroeconomic interdependence in the euro area”, Economic Modelling, Vol. 29(5), pp. 1686- 1714.  
Goodman, S.M., Kim, D. and VerWey, J. (2019), “ The South Korea- Japan trade 
dispute in context: Semiconductor manufacturing, chemicals, and concentrated supply chains ”, Working Paper , No ID -062, US International Trade Commission 
Office of Industries, October.  
Gopinath, G. and Stein, J. (2021), “ Banking, trade, and the making of a dominant 
currency ”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 136, Issue 2, pp. 783- 830. 
Gourinchas, P.O. (2022), “ Shifting Geopolitical Tectonic Plates ”, Finance and 
Development , IMF.  
Gossé, J.B., Jehle, C. and Julien- Vauzelle, B. (2022), “ The challenge of 
strengthening European financing for start -ups”, Eco notepad, No 286, Banque de 
France, October.  
Graaf, T. and Lesage, D.  (2015), “ Rising Powers and Multilateral Institutions ”, 
International Political Economy Series , Palgrave McMillan.  
Gräb , J. and Mehl , A. (2019), “ The benefits and costs of the international role of the 
euro at 20”, The international role of the euro, ECB, June.  
Gross, D. (2022), “ The European Chips initiative: Industrial policy at its absolute 
worst ”, Centre for European Policy Studies , 10 February.  
Grynberg, C. and Habib, M.M. (2021a) , “EU and ECB policy responses to the 
COVID -19 pandemic and the international role of the euro”, The international role of 
the euro, ECB, June.  
Grynberg, C. and Habib, M.M. (2021b), “ Non-euro area investors and SURE bonds 
issued by the European Commission”, The international role of the euro, ECB, June.  
Gourinchas, P.O. and Rey, H. (2007), “ From World Banker to World Venture 
Capitalist: U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege”, G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment , National Bureau of Economic 
Research, pp. 11- 66. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 180  
Gourinchas, P.O., Rey, H. and Sauzet, M. (2019), “ The International Monetary and 
Financial System ”, Vol. 11, Annual Review of Economics , pp. 859- 893. 
Guadalupe, M., Kuzmina, O. and Thomas, C.  (2012). "Innovation and Foreign 
Ownership", American Economic Review , Vol. 102 (7), pp. 3594- 3627.  
Gutiérrez,  G. and Philippon, T. (2019), “ Fading stars ”, Working Paper Series , No 
25529, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Guzi, M., Kahanec, M. and Mýtna Kureková, L. (2021), “ What Explains Immigrant -
Native Gaps in European Labor Markets: The Role of Institutions ”, Migration Studies , 
Volume 9, Issue 4, December, pp. 1823- 1856.  
Habib, M.M and Mehl, A. (2022), “The Russian invasion of Ukraine and international 
currencies”, The international role of the euro, ECB, June.  
Habib, M.M., Stracca, L. and Venditti, F. (2020), “ The fundamentals of safe 
assets ”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 102, No 102119, April.  
Häge, F. (2017), “ Chance- Corrected Measures of Foreign Policy Similarity (FPSIM 
Version 2) Data”, Harvard Dataverse.  
Hale, T., Angris t, N., Goldszmidt, R.  et al. (2021), “ A global panel database of 
pandemic policies (Oxford COVID -19 Government Response Tracker) ”, Nature 
Human Behav iour vol. 5 , pp. 529– 538.  
Hall, B.H. and Lerner, J. (2009), “ The Financing of R&D and Innovation”, in Hall, B. 
and Rosenberg, N. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Vol. 1, 
Elsevier, pp.  609- 639. 
Harrell, P. and Rosenberg, E. (2019), “ Economic Dominance, Financial Technology, 
and the Future of U.S. Economic Coercion”, Center for a New American Security, April.  
Harrison, A. and Rodríguez -Clare, A. (2010), “ Trade, Foreign Investment, and 
Industrial Policy for Developing Countries ”, in Rodrik, D. and Rosenzweig, M. (eds.), 
Handbook of Developing Economics , Vol. 5, pp. 4039- 4214.  
Hege, U., Palomino, F. and Schwienbacher, A. (2008), “ Venture capital performance: 
the disparity between Europe and the United States ”, University of Amsterdam 
Business School & Catholic University of Louvain.  
Heid, B., Larch, M. and Yotov, Y.V. (2021),  “Estimating the effects of non-
discriminatory trade policies within structural gravity models ”, Canadian Journal of 
Economics , Vol. 54, pp. 376- 409. 
Henning, C.R. (1998), “ Systemic Conflict and Regional Monetary Integration: The 
Case of Europe”, International Organization, Vol. 52, No 3, pp. 537- 573. 
Hess, J. and Kleinhans, J.P. (2021), “ Understanding the global chip shortages: Why 
and how the semiconductor value chain was disrupted”, Stiftung Neue 
Verantwortung, November.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 181  
Hoekman, B,  and Nelson, D.  (2021), “ Rethinking international subsidy rules ”, The 
World Economy , Vol. 43, pp. 3104– 3132. 
Horn, S., Reinhart, C.M. and Trebesch, C. (2021), “ China´s overseas lending”, 
Journal of International Economics , Vol. 133, No 103539.  
Hunter, P. (2013), “ Brain drain, brain gain or brain sharing? New studies of the 
migration routes of scientists show that international mobility benefits all parties 
including countries that are net exporters of researchers ”, EMBO Reports , Vol. 14, 
No 4, pp. 315- 318. 
IMF (2019), “ GFSR April 2019. Online Annex 1.1. Technical note”.  
IMF (2022), “ Global trade and value chains during the pandemic ”, World Economic 
Outlook , April, Chapter 4, pp. 87- 107.  
Ioannou, D., Pagliari, M.S. and Stracca, L. (2020), “ The international dimension of an 
incomplete EMU ”, Working Paper Series , No 2459, ECB.  
Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C.M. and Rogoff, K.S. (2019), “ Exchange Arrangements 
Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?”, Quarterly Journal of 
Economics,  Vol. 134 (2), pp. 599- 646. 
IRC Trade Task Force (2016), “ Understanding the weakness in global trade: What is 
the new normal?”, Occasional Paper Series , No 178, ECB, September.  
Irwin, D. A. (2020), The pandemic adds momentum to the deglobalization trend, Peterson Institute for International Economics, April.  
Itskhoki, O. and Moll, B. (2019), “ Optimal development policies with financial 
frictions ”, Econometrica, Vol. 87, Issue 1, pp.139- 173. 
Ivanova, P., Smith, C. and Wigglesworth, R. (2022).  “Financial warfare: will there be 
a backlash against the dollar?”, Financial Times, 7 April.  
Izquierdo Peinado, M., Moral Benito, E., Prades Illanes, E. and Quintana González, 
J. (2022), “ The propagation of worldwide sector -specific shocks”, Working Papers , 
No 2213, Banco de España.  
James, H. (2022), “ Inflation and globalisation: The Tawney Lecture 2022”, The 
Economic History Review , pp. 1-22.  
Jarociński, M. (2020), “ Central Bank Information Effects and Transatlantic spillovers ”, 
Working Paper Series , No 2482, ECB.  
Jauer, J., Liebig, T., Martin, J.P. and Puhani, P.A. (2019), “ Migration as an adjustment 
mechanism i n the crisis? A comparison of Europe and the United States 2006–
2016”, Journal of Population Economics , Vol. 32(1), Springer, pp. 1- 22. 
Javorcik, B.  (2004),  "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of 
Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages ", A merican 
Economic  Review , Vol. 94 (3),  pp. 605- 627. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 182  
Jiménez -Rodríguez, R. and Morales -Zumaquero, A. (2022), “ Commodity price pass -
through along the pricing chain”, Review of World Economics, Vol. 158, pp. 109- 125.  
JOIN  (2020) , “The EU's Cybersecurity Strategy for the Digital Decade”, Joint 
Communication from the European Commission and the High Representative of the 
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the European Parliament and the Council , December.   
Kahanec, M. (2012), “ Labor Mobility in an Enlarged European Union. International 
Handbook on the Economics of Migration”, in International Handbook on the 
Economics of Migration, Chapter 7, pp. 137- 152. 
Kataryniuk, I., Pérez, J.J. and Viani, F. (2021), “ (De-)Globalisation of trade and 
regionalisation: a survey of the facts and arguments ”, Occasional Papers , No 2124, 
Banco de España.  
Khalil, M. and Weber, M.D. (2022), “Chinese supply chain shocks”, Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper Series , (forthcoming).  
Klein, M.W. and J.C. Shambaugh (2015), “ Rounding the Corners of the Policy 
Trilemma: Sources of Monetary Policy Autonomy ”, American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics , Vol 7, No 4, pp. 33- 66. 
Kleinhans, J.P. (2021), “ The lack of semiconductor manufacturing in Europe: Why 
the 2nm fab is a bad investment ”, Policy Brief , Stiftung Neue Verantwortung, April.  
Kleinhans, J.P. and Lee, J. (2021), “ Mapping China’s semiconductor ecosystem in 
global context: Strategic dimensions and conclusions ”, Policy Brief , Stiftung Neue 
Verantwortung and MERICS, June.  
Knight, D., Winkler, D. and Wuester, L. (2022), “ The effects of Russia’s global value-
chain participation”, in Ruta, M. (ed.), The impact of the war in Ukraine on global 
trade and investment , World Bank, pp. 57- 69. 
Kramarz, F., Martin, J. and Mejean, I. (2020), “ Volatility in the Small and in the Large: 
The Lack of Diversification in International  trade”, Discussion Papers , No 11534, 
CEPR.  
Kuziemko, I. and Werker, E. (2006), “How Much Is a Seat on the Security Council 
Worth? Foreign Aid and Bribery at the United Nations ”, Journal of Political Economy , 
Vol. 114, No 5, pp. 905- 930. 
Lagarde, C. (2022a),  “A new global map: European resilience in a changing world”,  
keynote speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics,  Washington 
D.C., 22 April.  
Lagarde, C. (2022b), “ Monetary policy in a new environment ”, speech at the 
European Banking Congress, Frankfurt,18 November.  
Lane, P.R. (2019), “ Globalisation and monetary policy ”, speech at the University of 
California, 30 September.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 183  
Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi -Ferretti (2022), “ External Wealth of Nations database”,  
based on Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi -Ferretti (2018), " The External Wealth of 
Nations Revisited: International Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global 
Financial Crisis", IMF Economic Review , Vol. 66, pp.189- 222.  
Layne, C. (2012), “ This Time It's Real: The End of Unipolarity and the "Pax 
Americana”, International Studies Quarterly , Vol. 56 (1), pp. 203- 213.  
Leandro, Á. and Zettelmeyer, J. (2018),  “The Search for a Euro Area Safe Asset ”, 
Working Papers , No 18- 3, Peterson Institute for International Economics.  
Lipper t, B., von Ondarza, N. and Perthes, V.  (2019), “ European Strategic Autonomy: 
Actors, Issues, Conflicts of Interests ”, Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik Research 
Papers , No 4, German Institute for International and Security Affairs.  
Liu, E. (2020), “ Industrial policies in production networks ”, The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics , Vol. 134, Issue 4, pp. 1883- 1948.  
Lohmann, S. (2019), “ Extraterritorial U.S. sanctions ”, Comment 2019/C 05, Stiftung 
Wissenschaft und Politik , German Institute for International and Security Affairs.  
Macron, E. (2017), “ Initiative for Europe”, speech by the French President of the 
Republic, Emmanuel Macron, at the Sorbonne, 26 September 2017.  
Maggiori, M., Neiman B. and Schreger, J. (2020), “ International Currencies and 
Capital Allocation”, Journal of Political Economy , Vol. 128(6), pages 2019- 2066. 
University of Chicago Press.  
Manelici, I. and Pantea, S. (2020), “ Industrial policy at work: Evidence from 
Romania’s income tax break for workers in IT ”, European Economic Review , Vol. 
133, April.  
Martínez -Martín, J. (2016), " Breaking down world trade elasticities: a panel ECM 
approach ", Working Papers , No. 1614, Banco de España.  
McKinsey (2021), How COVID- 19 is reshaping supply chains , November.  
McWilliams, B., Tagliapietra, S. and Zachamnn, G. (2022), The grand energy bargain 
Europe needs to defeat Putin, Bruegel, August.  
Michel, C. (2020), “ Strategic autonomy for Europe – the aim of our generation”, 
speech by President Charles Michel to the Bruegel think tank , Speech No 603/20, 28 
September. 
Miranda- Agrippino, S. and Rey, H. (2020), “ US Monetary Policy and the Global 
Financial Cycle ”, The Review of Economic Studies , Vol. 87 (6), pp. 2754- 2776.  
Miroudot, S. (2020a), “ Lessons from the pandemic for trade cooperation on cross -
border supply chains ”, in Baldwin, R. and Evenett, S.J. (eds.), Revitalising 
Multilateralism: Pragmatic Ideas for the New WTO Director -General , London, UK: 
CEPR, pp. 141- 153. 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 184  
Miroudot, S. (2020b), “ Reshaping the policy debate on the implications of COVID -19 
for global supply chains ”, Journal of International Business Policy , No 3, pp. 430-
442. 
Moretti, E., Steinwender, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2019), “ The Intellectual Spoils of 
War? Defense R&D, Productivity and International Spillovers ”, Working Paper 
Series , No 26483, National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Mueller, J. (2023), “ China’s Foreign Aid: Political Determinants and Economic 
Effects ”, mimeo , Northwestern University.  
Mueller, H. and Rauh, C. (2022), “ The Hard Problem of Prediction for Conflict 
Prevention”, Journal of the European Economic Association, jvac025.  
Natal, J.M. and Stoffels, N. (2019), “ Globalization, Market Power, and the Natural 
Interest Rate”, Working Papers , No 19/95, IMF.  
Niemann. K. (2022), “ Regionalization of Global Value Chains - Evidence from micro 
data on US -imports ”, mimeo . 
Nölke, A. (2022), Geoeconomic infrastructures: Building Chinese- Russian 
alternatives to SWIFT , February.  
Nourzad, F. (1987), “ A Reexamination of the Effect of Rapid Military Spending on 
Inflation”, Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics,  Vol. 26(3), pp. 57- 66. 
Nurkse, R. (1944), “International Currency Experience”, Geneva: League of Nations . 
Oatley, T.  and  Yackee, J. (2004), “ American interests and IMF lending”, International 
Politics,  Vol. 41(3), pp.  415- 429. 
Obstfeld, M. (2020), “ Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy ”, International 
Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 16 (), pp. 73- 132. 
Obstfeld, M., J.D. Ostry and M.S. Qureshi (2019), “ A Tie that Binds: Revisiting the 
Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies ”, Review of Economics and Statistics . 
OECD (2020), OECD Digital Economy Outlook 2020, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2021), Trade in Value Added (TiVA) database, 2021 edition.  
OECD (2022),  International Migration Outlook 2022, OECD Publishing, Paris.  
OECD/European Union (2014),  Matching Economic Migration with Labour Market 
Needs , OECD Publishing, Paris.   
Panetta, F. (2020), “ Sharing and strengthening the euro’s pr ivilege ”, blog post , 12 
June.  
Panetta, F. (2021), “ Hic sunt leones’ – open research questions on the international 
dimension of central bank digital currencies”, speech at the ECB -CEBRA conference 
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 185  
on international aspects of digital currencies and fintech, Frankfurt am Main, 19 
October.  
Panetta, F. (2022a) , “Europe as a common shield: protecting the euro area economy 
from global shocks ”, keynote speech at the European Parliament’s Innovation Day 
“The EU in the worl d created by the Ukraine war” , Brussels, 1 July.  
Panetta, F. (2022b), “ The digital euro and the evolution of the financial system ”, 
introductory statement at  the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the 
European Parliament, 15 June.  
Passari, E. and Rey, H. (2015), “ Financial Flows and the International Monetary 
System ”, Economic J ournal , Vol. 125 (584), pp. 675- 698.  
Perla, J., Tonetti, C. and Waugh, M.E. (2015), “ Equilibrium Technology Diffusion, 
Trade, and Growth ”, Working Paper Series , No 20881, National Bureau of Economic 
Resear ch. 
Poitiers, N. and Weil, P. (2021), “ A new direction for the European Union’s half -
hearted semiconductor strategy ”, Policy Contri bution, No 17/21, Bruegel, July.  
Prato, M. (2022), The Global Race for Talent: Brain Drain, UCI School of Social 
Sciences.  
Presbitero, A.F. and A. Zazzaro (2012), “ IMF lending in times of crisis: political 
influences and crisis prevention”, World Development , Vol. 40(10), pp. 1944- 1969.  
Pogliani, P. and Wooldridge, P. (2022), “ Cross -border financial centres ”, BIS Working 
Papers , No 1035, Bank for International Settlements.  
Rachel, L. and Smith, T.D. (2015), “ Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate”, 
Working Paper , No 571, Bank of England  
Reinhart, C.M. and Rogoff, K.S. (2010), “ Growth in a Time of Debt ”, American 
Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings 100, May, pp. 573- 578. 
Reinhart, C.M.  (2019) , Remarks at the Fourth ECB Annual Research Conference, 5 
September . 
Revest, V. and Sapio, A. (2012), “ Financing technology -based small firms in Europe: 
what do we know? ”, Small Business Economics, Vol.  39, pp. 179- 205. 
Rey, H. (2016), “ International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the 
Mundellian Trilemma”, IMF Economic Review , Vol. 64 (1), pp. 6- 35 
Robertson, P. (2021), “ The Real Military Balan ce: International Comparisons of 
Defense Spending”, Vol. 68(3), Review of Income and Wealth, September, pp. 797-
818.  
Robotics247 (2022), “ ABB Survey Finds 70% of U.S. Businesses Looking to Bring 
Production Closer to Home”, 28 June.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 186  
Rodríguez -Clare, A, (2007), “ Clusters and comparative advantage: Implications for 
industrial policy ”, Journal of Development Economics , Vol. 82 (1), pp. 43- 57. 
Schmucker, C. (2021), “ The New Geo- Economic Environment and the EU’s Capacity 
to Act ”, DGAP Report , No 9, German Council on Foreign Relations, June.  
Slijper, T., de Mey , Y., Poortvliet , M. and Meuwissen, M.  (2022), “ Quantifying the 
resilience of European farms using FADN ”, European Review of Agricultural 
Economics , Volume 49, Issue 1, pp. 121– 150. 
Squicciarini, P., Swinnen, J. and Vandermoortele, T. (2011), “ The Food Crisis, Mass 
Media and the Political  Economy of Policy Analysis and Communication”, European 
Review of Agricultural Economics , Vol. 38, Issue 3, pp. 409- 26. 
Squicciarini, P. and Swinnen, J. (2012), “ Mixed Messages on Prices and Food 
Security ”, Science, Vol. 335, Issue 6067, pp. 405- 406. 
Stirling, A. (2015), “ Migrant employment outcomes in European labour markets ”, JP 
Morgan Chase – Institute for Public Policy Research, London.  
Sundquist, J. (2021), “ Bailouts from Beijing: How China Functions as an Alternative 
to the IMF”, Working Paper , No 015, Global Development Policy Centre, Boston 
University.  
Swinnen, J. (2016), “ The Common Agricultural Policy ”, in Badinger, H. and Nitsch, V. 
(eds.), The Routledge Handbook of the Economics of European Integration, Chapter 
18.  
Synergy Research Group (2021). “ Cloud Market Ends 2020 on a High while 
Microsoft Continues to Gain Ground on Amazon”. February 2, 2021.  
The Economist (2019), “ Slowbalisation: The future of global commerce”, 24 January.  
The Economist (2022), “ Can foreign currency reserves be sanction- proofed?”, 15 
March.  
Tunali, Ç.B. and Fidrmuc, J. (2015), “ State aid policy in the European Union”, Journal 
of Common Market Studies , Vol. 53, Issue 5, pp. 1143- 1162.  
United Nations (2018), “ Classification by Broad Economic Categories Rev. 5”, 
Statistical Papers , Series M, No 53.  
U.S. Geological Survey (2022), Mineral commodity summaries 2022, U.S. 
Geological Surv ey.  
UNCTAD (2020), Key Statistics and Trends in Trade Policy . 
Van den Abeele, É. (2021), “ Towards a new  paradigm in open strategic autonomy?”, 
Working Paper , No 2021.03, European Trade Union Institute.  
 
 
The EU’s Open Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective – References  
 
 187  
Varas, A., R. Varadarajan, R. Palma, J. Goodrich, and F. Yinug (2021), Strengthening 
the global semiconductor supply chain in an uncertain era, Boston Consulting Group 
and Semiconductor Industry Association, April.  
Vitaliano, D.F. (1984), “Defense Spending and Inflation: An Empirical Analysis ”, 
Quarterly Review of Economics and Business , Vol. 24 (1), pp. 22- 32. 
Vučinić, M. (2020), “ Fintech and Financial Stability. Potential Influence of FinTech on 
Financial Stability, Risks and Benefits ”, Journal of Central Banking Theory and 
Practic e, Vol. 2.  
Wang, Y. (2022), “ Defense Budget Growth and Inflation: A Wavelet -Based Study of 
the U.S. and Britain”, Political Studies Association.  
Weyzen, R. (2021), Digital Governance Act proposes sharing data for the public 
good and selflessness – the concept of Data Altruism , Support Centre for Data 
Sharing, 28 January . 
White House (2021), “ Building resilient supply chains, revitalizing American 
manufacturing, and fostering broad- based growth ”, 100- Day Reviews under 
Executive Order 14017, June.  
Work stream on globalisation (2021), “ The implications of globalisation for the ECB 
monetary policy strategy ”, Occasional Paper Series , No 263, ECB Strategy Review, 
ECB.  
Work stream on productivity, innovation and technological progress (2021),  “Key 
factors behind productivity trends in EU countries ”, Occasional Paper Series , 
No 268, ECB. 
Yellen, J.L. (2022), Special address at the Atlantic Council on the next steps for 
Russia sanctions and ‘friend- shoring’ supply chains , 13 April.  
Yotov , Y.V.  (2022), “ On the role of domestic trade flows for estimating the gravity 
model of trade ”, Contemporary Economic Policy , Vol. 40( 3 ), pp. 526– 540. 
© European Central Bank, 2023  
Postal address  60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany  
Telephone +49 69 1344 0
Website  www.ecb.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Any reproduction, publication and reprint in the form of a different publication, whether printed or produced 
electronically, in whole or in part, is permitted only with the explicit written authorisation of the ECB or the authors.  
This paper can be downloaded without charge from the ECB websit e or from RePEc: Research Papers in Economics . Information on all 
of the papers published in the ECB Statistics Paper Series can be found on the ECB’s website. 
PDF ISBN 978-92-899-6055-7, ISSN 1725-6534, doi:10.2866/602215, QB-AQ-23-002-E N-N 
