1 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paper
Elvire Fabry,  
Senior Research Fellow
 
Nicolas Köhler-Suzuki, 
Associate Researcher
Pascal Lamy, President 
Emeritus, Coordinator 
of the Jacques Delors 
Think Tank Network 
(Paris, Berlin, Brussels)
Marco Sibona, 
Research Assistant
The authors would 
like to thank Arthur 
Leichthammer and 
Sylvie Matelly for their 
helpful comments 
on an earlier draft. 
Any remaining errors are 
the sole responsibility of 
the authors.EUROPE IN  
THE WORLD
POLICY PAPER N°298
FEBRUARY 2024
#EconomicSecurity
#strategy
© FreepikShields Up:  
How China,  
Europe, Japan  
and the United  
States Shape  
the World through 
Economic Security
 Executive Summary 
With geopolitical tensions on the rise and increasing trade and investment res-
trictions worldwide, the European Union adopted an Economic Security Strategy 
in June 2023. This paper compares the EU’s evolving economic security policies 
with the strategies of three other prominent global actors–the United States, China 
and Japan–to better understand the Union’s approach and contribute to the debate 
shaping Europe’s economic security agenda. The paper highlights motivations, his-
torical developments, institutional structures and policy interventions to compare 
and contrast the different approaches. The paper also illustrates the negative emula-
tion effect of economic security measures, which increase the risk of a balkanisation 
of global supply chains. The analysis shows that the United States and China have 
more long-standing traditions of economic statecraft compared to more recent eco-
nomic security concerns in Japan and the EU. The US is reviving and repurposing 
Cold War tools for new challenges. China has shifted from a development-oriented 
economic policy to a security-oriented agenda, but regime security has remained 
a constant motivation. Japan’s territorial dispute with China has catalysed Tokyo’s 
shift towards supply chain resilience since 2010 and contributed to recent initia-
tives for the institutionalisation of economic security. In this context, the EU stands 
out with its sui generis institutional constraints, most notably how security remains 
a competence of member states. At the same time, the EU must develop better ins-
truments to protect itself from global headwinds. Adopting the Economic Security 
Strategy is a step in the right direction, but it is not enough. The lack of European 
governance structures and shared risk assessments is an institutional flaw that 
hinders the development of long-term thinking that can more readily be found in 

2 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperBeijing and Washington. The Union needs to establish a more dynamic, responsive 
and inclusive infrastructure involving both member states and the business sector–
two key actors in the implementation of the European economic security strategy. 
Our key recommendations are to establish an Economic Security Commissioner 
to facilitate coordination and lead the process, create an Economic Security EU 
Council configuration to incentivise member states in creating their own structures 
and establish a Forum on Economic Security to bring together member states and 
companies to adjust the risk evaluation methodology and lead to the creation of a 
European Agency on Economic Security, tasked with developing analytical instru-
ments for monitoring and foresight objectives. The paper also emphasises the role 
of the Single Market as the Union’s main economic security asset and how it should 
be seen not only as a space for fair competition but also as a space for capacity 
mutualisation. The EU should also draw inspiration from the Japanese concept of 
‘strategic indispensability’ in critical technologies to position itself as a crucial actor 
in global technology value chains and fortify niche technology leadership. At the 
same time, the Union should reinvigorate its partnership efforts, as international 
and trade agreements remain a comparative strength.
 Introduction
Rising geopolitical tensions are beginning to impact global trade networks, supply 
chains, and investment flows.1 These fissures are compounded by advances in 
digital technology that introduce new advantages and vulnerabilities. Such struc -
tural shifts have contributed to an increase in trade and investment restrictions, 
not only as government responses to economic disputes but as integral compo-
nents of broader national security strategies.
However, pursuing such measures in an interconnected world presents a challenge. 
The global economy remains an interdependent network in which actions taken 
by one country reverberate across borders.2 Economic security measures there-
fore have far-reaching implications, potentially disrupting production systems and 
inviting tit-for-tat retaliation. 
The challenge for policymakers is to navigate a thin line between openness and 
security. Open markets have long been driving economic growth and innovation, 
but domestic and international pressures to shield critical sectors of the economy 
from foreign influence have increased significantly in recent years. Balancing these 
competing priorities requires a nuanced understanding of the global economy and 
the strategies governments employ to advance their (perceived) national interests.
Our paper contributes to the debate over the European Union’s economic security 
agenda. As one of the world’s most open economies, the EU has tried to readjust its 
deep integration in global trade and investment networks to a more hostile external 
environment, including political dysfunction in the United States, the growth of 
Chinese influence, and Russian belligerence at its borders. Most notably, these 
efforts have resulted in the June 2023 European Economic Security Strategy and 
in a January 2024 package of proposals designed to put the strategy into action.
1 Aiyar, Shekhar, Ilyina, Anna, and others (2023). Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Future of 
Multilateralism. Staff Discussion Note SDN/2023/001. International Monetary Fund.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2023/01/11/Geo-Economic-
Fragmentation-and-the-Future-of-Multilateralism-527266 
2 OECD. (2023). Deglobalisation? The reorganisation of global value chains in a changing world (OECD 
Trade Policy papers). https://www.oecd.org/publications/deglobalisation-the-reorganisation-of-
global-value-chains-in-a-changing-world-b15b74fe-en.htm
3 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperTo better understand the EU’s evolving approach towards economic security, we 
compare and contrast it with the strategies of three other crucial actors: China, 
the United States and Japan. We highlight the motivations and challenges these 
countries face in their economic security agendas and identify policy interven-
tions that could also help strengthen EU processes. Moreover, we write with an eye 
towards the cumulative long-term effect of economic security measures, which 
raises questions about a fragmentation of the global economy and its potential 
impact on economic growth and development, and the fight against common ene-
mies of humanity like climate change or pandemics.
I   What is economic security? 
Finding a comprehensive definition of economic security is in itself a challenging 
exercise. Historical precedent shows how relative shifts in economic capabilities 
influence national security priorities.3 At the same time, each country has a unique 
mix of interest groups, commercial strategies and foreign policies that shape its 
outlook on the potential and limits of economic statecraft. Therefore, economic 
security is closely tied to a country’s ability to strategically integrate and remove 
itself from international economic relations in a way that protects and advances 
idiosyncratic interests. In other words, economic security lies in the eye of the 
beholder.
This is exacerbated by the fact that in each capital, different epistemic commu-
nities drive at times conflicting narratives. Economic security agendas sit at the 
intersection of at least two sets of policymakers: in one corner, the security policy 
community, which tends to see the world as a zero-sum competition, and in the 
other, economic policymakers who traditionally value positive-sum effects from 
the international division of labour. Both groups have distinct internal incentive 
structures and follow different logic. Both groups are also shaped by the rise of 
populist movements demanding protection from real and perceived risks of globa-
lisation.
The debate over de-risking and decoupling vis-a-vis China illustrates this point. 
The EU has preferred a de-risking terminology, which implies a gradual approach 
to improving economic security by reducing significant vulnerabilities while mostly 
maintaining open trade and investment relationships. In contrast, discussions of 
economic security in the US have been dominated by a rhetoric of decoupling, a 
term that implies the disconnection between economic systems, including sepa-
rate technological and manufacturing spheres. Notably, the EU, with a trade-to-GDP 
ratio of 43 per cent, is much more dependent on international trade and investment 
than the US, with a trade-to-GDP ratio of 26 per cent.4 Moreover, the EU continues 
to have limited sway over national security issues, while the military-industrial com-
plex is a key player in  Washington power games.5
While the US has recently started to follow EU de-risking terminology to describe 
its engagement with China, questions remain if there is a gap between rhetoric and 
action. Senior US officials, such as National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan and Trea-
sury Secretary Janet Yellen, have stressed that the US is limiting itself to calibrated 
3 Gilpin, R. (1981). War and Change in World Politics. Cambridge University Press.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511664267
4 European Commission (2021), DG Trade Statistical Guide. Note that EU figures exclude intra-EU 
trade.
5 Pemberton, M. (2022). Six Stops on the National Security Tour: Rethinking Wartime Economies. 
Routledge.
4 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Papereconomic security measures, the so-called ‘small yard with a high fence’.6 However, 
there is significant collateral damage from recent US policies on the Chinese eco-
nomy. China imports more semiconductors than oil, and only a small fraction of 
semiconductors are procured by the Chinese government, including for military and 
intelligence applications.7 This could imply that the ‘small yard’ is a rather large park, 
and the stated US intention for technological supremacy goes beyond a calibrated 
approach for dual-use goods.
In this context, it is helpful to differentiate between the short-term and long-term 
aims of economic security policies.8 
Some economic security measures have a short-term outlook focusing on imme-
diate responses to crises or emerging threats, such as medical supplies during a 
pandemic or armaments during a war. They emphasise quick, reactive measures 
to ensure supply chain resilience and mitigate the immediate risks posed by 
economic coercion or market disruptions. The challenge lies in balancing these 
protective measures with another immediate need: maintaining economic stabi-
lity. Interventions in companies’ trade and investment networks must therefore be 
limited to avoid disrupting their operations.
This contrasts with economic security measures that contribute to long-term policy 
planning at the highest levels of government (so-called ‘grand strategies’). Whether 
or not any plan can withstand changing political currents over a longer period of 
time, such economic security measures can at least lock in path dependencies. 
Longer-term economic security measures in this context include strengthening 
domestic innovation capacity, investing in critical technologies with dual-use 
applications, diversifying supply chains, enhancing domestic production capa-
bilities, and forging strategic international partnerships for reliable market 
access and sourcing of imports. They aim to create a robust economic founda-
tion to withstand external shocks and advance geopolitical interests. In contrast to 
the positive-sum logic of economic integration, they often more closely follow the 
zero-sum logic of national security. Therefore, long-term economic security mea-
sures are shaped by a country’s relative strength in the international system, e.g., 
whether they are a middle power, a hegemon, or a rising power.
Over the last decades, the geopolitical background against which countries 
define their economic security policies has also significantly shifted. During the 
bipolar Cold War era, the positive externalities from economic integration through 
membership in the GATT’s most favoured nation (MFN) system were primarily inter -
nalised amongst US allies but also shared with the ‘third-world’ countries that were 
on the fence between the Western and Eastern blocs.9  In the unipolar period of the 
6 Yellen, J. L. (2023, April 20). Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on the U.S. - China 
economic relationship at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. U.S. Department of 
The Treasury. https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1425 ; Sullivan, J. (2023a, April 
27). Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on renewing American economic leadership at 
the Brookings Institution. The White House. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-
remarks/2023/04/27/remarks-by-national-security-advisor-jake-sullivan-on-renewing-american-
economic-leadership-at-the-brookings-institution/ 
7 Hill, A. (2022, December 7). The great chip war — and the challenge for global diplomacy. Financial 
Times. https://www.ft.com/content/7de40326-58a9-457b-a828-edf86031883e ; Edgecliffe-
Johnson, A. (2023, January 17). Companies race to work around choke points in world trade. 
Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/a8ebdf55-1bdf-42da-90cd-73ceb960e60f; Yoon, J. 
(2022, December 23). A fake baby bump shows the limits of US chip sanctions on China. Financial 
Times. https://www.ft.com/content/a59224da-e86d-4289-aa95-41e6b7a04c0d 
8 Cf. the typology developed by Paulsen, M. (2024). The past, present, and potential of economic 
security. Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4604958 
9 Gowa, J. (1995). Allies, adversaries, and international trade. Princeton University Press.  
https://doi.org/10.1515/9780691221342
5 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paper1990s and 2000s, with a few exceptions, the world essentially became an increa-
singly integrated market. The guiding policy amongst the US and its allies was that 
economic integration would facilitate interstate peace and rising middle classes 
would support the transition towards democracy. Importantly, if global economic 
integration were to reverse in the coming decades, the process would be easier to 
manage for countries with a large domestic market and high economic complexity.
Such trade-offs between economic integration and national security matter for 
how a country defines its economic security strategy. Diversifying supply chains 
through friend-shoring and reshoring measures increases costs, as reliance on 
the most cost-efficient supplier is reduced in favour of what are considered more 
secure alternatives that are more expensive. While this diversification may be cru-
cial for improving economic security, especially in some critical sectors, it leads to 
higher consumer prices and reduced competitiveness for businesses in the global 
market. In turn,  lower competitiveness and growth in the long run also translate to 
less power and influence on the world stage. 
Economic security is, therefore, clearly not a monolithic concept. Its definition 
varies depending on the size of an economy, domestic interest groups, and strategic 
interests. This diversity of objectives underscores the need for analytical clarity. 
The effectiveness and implications of economic security policies can only be fully 
appreciated through a context-specific examination of specific measures.
The following section examines the motivations and actions of the key players. 
Figure 1 below provides an overview of the main developments since 2010.
FIGURE 1.  The evolution of main economic security initiatives 
Promote: Policies with the aim of strengthening domestic capacities
Protect: Economic security tools to manage external risks
Partner: Friendshoring and diversification to de-risk strategic dependencies
Rare earth exports 
ban to Japan following 
fishing trawler dispute
Norwegian salmon 
imports plummet after 
Liu Xiaobo is awarded 
Nobel Peace Prize
Obama administration  
“Pivot to Asia”  10/2010
11/2010US joins Trans-Pacific 
Partnership (TPP) 
negotiations09/2010
10/2010
Xi Jinping inaugurated 03/2013National Security 
Council established  09/2013 Belt and Road Initiative 
launched
12/2013
National Security 
Strategy
Overall National 
Security Outlook12/2013
04/2014
Made In China 2025 
industrial policy 05/2015
Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP)  signed02/2016
6 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperEstablishment of the 
Central Military-Civil 
Fusion Development 
Committee
Donald Trump inaugurated01/2017
01/2017
TPP withdrawal
Boycotts of South Korean 
goods and services 
following deployment of 
THAAD missile defense
Tariffs on steel and  
aluminum imports  
Tariffs on 50 billion USD 
of Chinese imports
EU-Japan Economic 
Partnership Agreement 
signed
Export Controls 
Reform Act  
Japan-US Trade 
Agreement signed
Ursula von der Leyen 
inaugurated
Toolbox for 5G security800 billion EUR 
NextGenerationEU 
agreedHuawei and ZTE 
declared “threats to 
national security”
Inbound FDI 
screening tightened
Foreign Investment LawEuropean Green DealForeign Investment 
Risk Review 
Modernization Act
Huawei and ZTE banned 
from government 
procurement01/2017
03/2017
03/2018
07/2018
07/2018
08/2018
10/2019
12/2019
01/202007/202006/2020
06/2020
01/2020Unreliable Entity List 
Export Control law
Regional Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership (RCEP) 
signedFDI screening regulation
Joe Biden inaugurated 
Duties on Australian Wine 
following Australian inquiry 
of COVID origins
European Industrial 
Strategy
Updated dual-use 
export controls 09/2020
10/2020
11/202010/2020
01/2021
03/2021
05/2021
G7 Build Back Better 
World (Partnership for 
Global Infrastructure and 
Investment) launched 
Trade and Technology 
Council established
Data Security Law 06/2021
06/2021
06/2021
US lifts tariffs on steel 
and aluminum for 
imports from EU10/2021
Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act11/2021Cybersecurity Law 11/2016
7 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperChinese customs block 
imports from Lithuania 
following naming 
dispute over Taiwanese 
representation in Vilnius
Global Gateway strategy 12/2021
12/2021
Indo-Pacific Economic 
Framework for Prosperity 
(IPEF) launched 
Economic Security 
Promotion Act
Export Controls 
on Semiconductor 
Manufacturing EquipmentCHIPS and Science Act
Semiconductor export 
controls
Review of export controls 
for technology
Commission Proposal for 
Net Zero Industry Act
EU Economic Security 
StrategyEU-New Zealand trade 
agreement signed
European Chips Act
Critical Raw Materials 
Act adopted by European 
Parliament
Upgraded EU-Chile FTA 
signedUpdated EU Control List 
of Dual-Use ItemsExport controls on gallium 
and germanium
US outbound investments 
screening proposal
The Sources of American 
Power: A Foreign Policy 
for a Changed WorldExpanded export controls 
on semiconductorsExport controls on graphite 
Ban on rare earth 
processing technologyAnti-Coercion Instrument 
adopted
Updated Network and 
Information Security Directive 
(NIS2)Inflation Reduction Act05/2022
05/2022
03/202308/2022
10/2022
12/2022
03/2023
06/202307/2023
09/2023
12/202308/2023
09/2023
11/202310/202310/2023
12/202310/2023
12/2022
II   Comparative Perspectives
 IECONOMIC SECURITY IN THE UNITED STATES: OLD TOOLS IN NEW SHEDS.
In November 2017, the Trump administration’s national security strategy declared 
that ‘economic security is national security’. It was the latest evolution in decades of 
US economic statecraft, according to Trump’s trade policy adviser Peter Navarro the 
‘new organising principle for strategic policy’, and a concept imparted to the Biden 
administration. However, most of the economic security tools the US uses today 
have already been in place since the Cold War, and thus belong to a lasting tradi-
tion of economic statecraft. The infamous Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act, 
8 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperwhich was cited in 2018 to impose tariffs on steel and aluminium imports on national 
security grounds dates back 1962, and the 1974 Trade Act similarly contains provi-
sions for trade defence measures. Export control regulations and the Committee on 
Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) have been around since the 1970s, 
with some powers derived from the Defense Production Act of 1950 and a Wes-
tern export control coordination mechanism established in 1949.10 While the Trump 
administration merely revived tools that had been dormant for much of the unipolar 
period during the 1990s and 2000s, its national strategy was the turning point for 
a new era of US economic statecraft. It called for a fusion of information from the 
diplomatic, military and economic domains, a revitalisation of the US industrial base 
and the preservation of technological advantage in response to the new strategic 
context, and increased economic competition in the aftermath of the 2008 global 
financial crisis.
One of the main objectives of Trump’s national strategy was to respond to China’s 
trade and commercial practices of foreign states, which it defined as a “revisionist 
power ”. While China had already started to receive more attention in Washington 
after Obama’s 2011 ‘pivot to Asia’, the US continued to follow a more cooperative 
approach before the Trump administration. In October 2011, for example, Secretary 
Clinton was still open to discussing Chinese purchases of American high-tech pro-
ducts11 in exchange for certain market reforms, while in 2018 Trump’s United States 
Trade Representative (USTR) openly accused China of “stealing our technology” and 
declared the need to protect US innovation.12 Beginning with the Trump presidency, 
the China shock thus became a key interpretive lens of the new US approach 
to economic security and was soon shared across the political spectrum.13 In April 
2023, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen rejected any attempt to decouple from China, 
stressing that US initiatives were not aimed at stifling Chinese economic growth and 
technological improvement and that measures would be narrowly focused and tar -
geted.14 But whether the actual impact of US economic security initiatives matches 
these claims is debatable. Finally, in a bipartisan spirit, the US House of Represen-
tatives also established a new Committee on the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) 
in January 2023 by a vote of 365 to 65.15 Former House Speaker McCarthy made 
it clear that the committee would address issues such as bringing jobs back to the 
US, protecting intellectual property and moving supply chains to the domestic eco-
nomy. Accordingly, in December 2023, the Committee adopted a report containing 
around 150 policy recommendations that outline a decoupling approach.16
The other major driver of US economic security policy is a rethinking of the role 
of globalisation and the US government in the economy and of the neoliberal 
10 The Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (CoCom). 
11 Clinton, H. (2023, February 11). Hillary Clinton: America’s Pacific Century and the Pivot to Asia. 
Foreign Policy. https://foreignpolicy.com/2011/10/11/americas-pacific-century/ 
12 Politi, J. (2018, November 20). Trump’s trade hawk prepares to swoop on Beijing. Financial Times. 
https://www.ft.com/content/0cf1948c-ebba-11e8-89c8-d36339d835c0
13  E.g., see Foroohar, R. (2023, November 2). Jennifer Harris: ‘Everything costs something in foreign 
policy terms. There are no free lunches here either.’ Financial Times.  
https://www.ft.com/content/f52fb843-e419-4cd9-8e2d-b7485c5cda7d 
14 See note 4.  
15 146 Democrats voted in favour. Zengerle, P . (2023, January 11). New U.S. House creates committee 
focused on competing with China. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/us/new-us-house-
creates-committee-focused-competing-with-china-2023-01-10/  
16 Reset, Prevent, Build: A Strategy to Win America’s Economic Competition with the Chinese Communist 
Party. (2023, December 12). Select Committee on the CCP . https://selectcommitteeontheccp.
house.gov/media/policy-recommendations/reset-prevent-build-strategy-win-americas-economic-
competition-chinese 
9 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperpolicies that have defined the last three decades.17 This dimension is a byproduct 
of the Biden administration in response to the health, industrial, climate and China 
crisis, but, as with the China policy, originated in the Trump administration. In March 
2021, the National Economic Council Director, Brian Deese, illustrated the core of 
the new US industrial policy. Mentioning a certain short-sightedness in the private 
sector and public approach to domestic production, Deese defined five pillars to put 
security, sustainability and resilience back at the centre of American economic 
statecraft. Supply chain resilience targeted public investment, public procurement, 
climate resilience and equity were identified as the pillars of a new industrial policy 
for a new economic and competitive global environment18. Accordingly, National 
Security Advisor Jake Sullivan claimed that “international power depends on a strong 
domestic economy [...] which [...] works for all Americans and is free of dangerous 
dependencies”19. In line with this belief, on several occasions, the idea of tearing 
down the barrier between domestic and foreign policy came out20. A new national 
industrial policy thus appears to have a key role in shoring up the US’ national and 
economic security21.
Strong domestic manufacturing and de-risking – as announced in Jake Sullivan’s 
April 2023 “small yard, high fence” doctrine – thus emerge as the main components 
of Biden’s approach to economic security.22 Three big pieces of legislation were 
aimed at doing so, the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (November 
2021), the CHIPS and Science Act (August 2022), and the Inflation Reduction Act 
(August 2022). Several executive orders dealing with supply chains have also been 
adopted within this framework.23 Yet we should not consider this legislation to be 
country-agnostic, to the contrary. In April 2023 the US Dept. of Energy issued an 
interpretative rule24 for the definition of “foreign entity of concern” (FEOC) first pre-
sented in the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and then maintained both in 
the CHIPS and Science Act and in the IRA. FEOCs are thus entities linked to the 
People’s Republic of China, the Russian Federation, the Democratic People’s Repu-
blic of North Korea, and the Islamic Republic of Iran. On 1 December, 2023, the US 
Dept. of Treasury clarified that eligibility to IRA’s tax credits and incentives is res-
tricted starting in 2024 for vehicles containing battery components manufactured 
or assembled by an FEOC and starting in 2025 for vehicles containing any critical 
mineral extracted, processed or recycled by an FEOC25. 
As seen globally over the last decade, the American de-risking policy is also based 
on export controls and investment screening (both inbound and outbound). Invest -
ment controls are overseen by the CFIUS, first established in 1975, which reviews 
17 Fazili, S., Flegal, J., Harris, J., Jones, J., Rahman, K. S., Wu, T., & Tucker, T. T. (2023). Industrial  
Policy Synergies: Reflections from Biden Administration Alumni. Roosvelt Institute.  
https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/RI_Industrial-Policy-Synergies-
Reflections-from-Biden-Administration-Alumni_Report_202304.pdf 
18 Deese, B. (2021, June 23). The Biden White House plan for a new US industrial policy. Atlantic Council. 
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/commentary/transcript/the-biden-white-house-plan-for-a-new-
us-industrial-policy/ 
19 Sullivan, J. (2023, November 28). The Sources of American Power: A Foreign Policy for a Changed 
World. Foreign Affairs. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/united-states/sources-american-power-
biden-jake-sullivan  
20 E.g., see Biden Administration National Security Strategy (2022) and ibid. 
21 See note 18. 
22 See note 4.  
23 Weinstock, L. R. (2022). Summary of Selected Biden Administration Actions on Supply Chains. 
Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11927   
24 Interpretation of Foreign Entity of Concern. (2023). Federal Register. https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2023/12/04/2023-26479/interpretation-of-foreign-entity-of-concern  
25 U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2023, December 1). Treasury Releases Proposed Guidance to 
Continue U.S. Manufacturing Boom in Batteries and Clean Vehicles, Strengthen Energy Security [Press 
release]. https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy1939  
10 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperinvestments that may result in foreign control of US businesses, of non-controlling 
stakes of businesses involved with critical technologies, infrastructures or sensitive 
personal data, and of real estate near-certain critical infrastructure.26 Its statu-
tory authority derives from the 1950 Defense Production Act. It was only in 2018 
that the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) expanded 
the committee’s jurisdiction, thereby granting CFIUS the powers to review invest -
ments in non-controlling stakes in the abovementioned businesses and real estate 
in the proximity of critical infrastructure.27 In August 2023, President Biden also 
issued an executive order controlling US outbound investments in certain critical 
technologies made in selected countries of concern, an unprecedented initiative in 
investment screenings.28 
Current US export controls seem to aim to limit the technological advancement of 
rival countries, an approach similar to that of the CoCom, although no similar insti-
tutionalised coordinating mechanism has emerged so far.29 Today, the US governs 
export controls via the 1976 Arms Export Control Act (AECA), the 1977 Interna-
tional Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) and the 2018 Export Controls 
Reform Act  (ECRA). The ECRA also requires establishing an interagency process to 
determine new controls on emerging and foundational technologies.30 In February 
2024, the National Science and Technology Council published the latest list of cri-
tical and emerging technologies, identifying 140 categories. While this list is not 
binding nor a strategic document, it serves to inform efforts aimed at reinforcing 
technological leadership and guaranteeing national security.31 A key actor in admi-
nistering export licensing and enforcement functions for the export of dual-use 
goods is the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), established in 1985 and whose 
law enforcement authority was expanded by ECRA in 2018. The BIS contributes 
to the determination of emerging technologies critical to US national security and 
manages the Entity List, where persons involved or likely to be involved in activi-
ties against US national security are reported and denied export licences. The BIS 
was thus among the main actors restricting Huawei’s technology exports starting 
in 2019. 
Another crucial dimension of US economic security is found in cybersecurity and 
infrastructure resilience. Protecting national critical infrastructure emerged as a 
concern during the late 1990s, with the 9/11 attacks becoming a key turning point. 
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was created as a response to the 
attacks, with responsibilities including securing cyberspace and critical infrastruc -
ture; preserving and upholding America’s prosperity and economic security, and 
strengthening preparedness and resilience.32 Most of DHS authority relates to three 
26 Cimino-Isaacs, C. D., & Sutter, K. M. (2023). The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United 
States . Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF /IF10177 & 
Mulligan, S. P ., & Linebaugh, C. D. (2023). National Security Review Bodies (Part I): Legal Context and 
Comparison. Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/LSB/
LSB11034 
27 Ibid. 
28 Semiconductors and microelectronics, quantum information technologies and artificial intelligence. 
29 Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls (CoCom), a Western coordinating 
mechanism applying strategic export controls on technologies to countries part of the Council 
for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon), an economic organisation (1949-1991) aimed at 
coordinating socialist economies. 
30 Kerr, P . K., & Casey, C. A. (2021). The U.S. Export Control System and the Export Control Reform Act of 
2018. Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46814 
31 Fast Track Action Subcommittee on Critical and Emerging Technologies & National Science 
and Technology Council. (2024). Critical and Emerging Technologies List Update. https://www.
whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Critical-and-Emerging-Technologies-List-2024-
Update.pdf 
32 Mission | Homeland Security. U.S. Department of Homeland Security. https://www.dhs.gov/mission  
11 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperkey domains for economic security: law enforcement, emergency management, and 
infrastructure protection.33 In 2018, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Secu-
rity Agency was established within the DHS and in 2019, it identified 56 National 
Critical Functions (NCF), which should serve as the basis for a nationwide risk mana-
gement approach. The idea is to decompose an NCF in multiple layers and adopt a 
functional perspective to analyse critical infrastructure. This, in turn, is integrated 
with an Infrastructure Resilience Planning Framework (IRPF), which serves as gui-
dance for communities at every level in the US “to identify critical infrastructure, 
assess related risks, and develop and implement resilience solutions”.34 The IRPF 
aims to do so via very specific advice and actionable activities, going from critical 
infrastructure identification and risk assessment to implementation and evaluation.
Finally, trade initiatives aimed at creating and strengthening international 
partnerships and diversifying suppliers and markets deserve some consideration. 
A  stark difference can be noted here compared to the EU, Japan and China. 
While they all engaged in extensive international partnerships via trade deals or 
infrastructure projects, the US approach is characterised by the style of the last 
two presidencies. On one hand, while the negotiation of the Transatlantic Trade and 
Investment Partnership (TTIP) were halted in November 2016, just before the elec -
tion of Trump, his conception of trade as a zero-sum game led to the withdrawal 
from the TPP ,35 to the replacement of North-American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA)36 by the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA)37 but also to 
the Japan-US Trade Agreement and to the Blue Dot Network,38 a global infrastruc -
ture development initiative launched together with Japan and Australia in 2019. On 
the other hand, Biden aimed to establish broader multi-national partnerships and 
reduce friction with allies. In 2021, Biden launched the G7 Build Back Better World39 
and the Trade and Technology Council (TTC) with the EU - allowing for suspending 
the 2018 tariffs on steel and aluminium. Then, in 2022, the Indo-Pacific Economic 
Framework (IPEF) was launched with the goal of strengthening partnerships in 
the Indo-Pacific region and countering China’s influence. Yet despite huge finan-
cial pledges and vast programs, Biden’s international partnerships do not deliver 
as while further market access was denied by domestic pushback. Thus, despite 
greater efforts in engaging with international partners compared to the Trump 
administration, it appears that under Biden international partnerships were also not 
at the core of the US economic security approach. 
 IECONOMIC SECURITY IN CHINA: A FOUNDATION OF REGIME STABILITY
Since the foundation of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, preserving the cen-
trality of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) in the ruling system has led to an 
extensive national security approach with economic security as the cornerstone 
of broader political and regime security. The regulatory framework of economic 
security has been under constant change. But, since his arrival into power in 2012, 
Xi Jinping has strongly contributed to institutionalising and expanding the scope 
33 Gerstein, D. M., & Ligor, D. C. (2023). Economic Security and the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security: Addressing a Changed World and Evolved Threat Landscape. RAND.  
https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA2210-1.html 
34 Infrastructure Resilience Planning Framework. (2024). Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security 
Agency. https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/infrastructure-resilience-planning-
framework-irpf  
35 Trans-Pacific Partnership, a twelve nations trade deal including the US, Japan, Mexico, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, Vietnam, Peru, Chile, Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei. 
36 North American Free Trade Agreement, entered into force in 1994. 
37 United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement, replacing NAFTA and entered into force in 2020. 
38 Blue Dot Network. United States Department of State. https://www.state.gov/blue-dot-network/ 
39 Renamed in 2022 as Partnership for Global Infrastructure Investments. 
12 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperof economic security, owing to the belief that globalisation might increase some 
risks. Since Deng Xiaoping, regime stability was obtained primarily via a develop-
ment-driven economic policy, but they took care to “open the window [to foreign 
technologies and access to global markets, critical inputs] with a mosquito net 
[against excessive competition, destabilising short-term investment flows]”.40 Ins-
tead, Xi reframed economic security as the “foundation” of political and national 
security, as stated in 201441 and 202242. His economic policy has been increasingly 
driven by strategic objectives linked to national security, with industrial policy 
goals being awarded greater importance than socio-economic ones.43 
Yet, there is a continuity between these periods with China’s “innovation impera-
tive”,44 which earlier had the short-term goal of catching up technologically and 
now has the long-term goal of developing new technologies to sustain China’s eco-
nomic growth and rise to power. The evolution in economic security policies can 
thus be traced back to the evolution of the “innovation imperative” in different 
stages – and the consequent US reaction. Technological development is at the core 
of the issue, as most of China’s economic security measures deal with controlling 
technology exports or investments. Today, economic security is not only a reac -
tive concept but also proactive, given the significant presence of industrial policies 
within this framework. With legislation aiming to protect “national security and inte-
rests”, and having very broad goals and mandate, economic security soon becomes 
a “big yard with moving fences” to rephrase the expression of US National Security 
Advisor Jake Sullivan.
In April 2014, the Central National Security Commission of the CCP presented its 
“Overall National Security Outlook” covering eleven areas (politics, territory, military, 
economy, culture, society, science and technology, information, ecology, nuclear and 
natural resources), and providing a first very comprehensive definition of Chinese 
national security. In May 2015, China’s Central State Council called for an improved 
examination of foreign investment, and in July 2015, the National Security Law of 
the PRC called for a “comprehensive understanding of national security” and to 
build a “national security system (…) with Chinese characteristics”. The arrival of 
Xi thus determined the construction of a coherent, structured and comprehensive 
body of legislation for national and economic security, driving a rapid evolution of 
the legal and regulatory framework compared to the previous period, where policy 
initiatives were mostly perceived as inconsistent and uncoordinated.
2015 was also the year China issued its “Made in China 2025” industrial strategy 
aiming to develop all high-tech industries,45 achieve greater indigenous innovation 
and reduce reliance on foreign suppliers for basic components and materials. The 
40 Rodrik, D. (2024, February 15). « Chinamérique » : sortir de l’hypocrisie. Les Echos. https://www.
lesechos.fr/idees-debats/editos-analyses/chinamerique-sortir-de-lhypocrisie-2076428 
41 ”[T]he security of the people is the purpose, the security of politics is the bedrock, and the security 
of the economy is the cornerstone” in Tsuchiya, T. (2021). China Strengthens Its Economic Security. 
Japan Institute of International Affairs. https://www.jiia.or.jp/en/column/2021/05/12-china-
strengthens-its-economic-security.html 
42 “Political security as the bedrock (根本), economic security as the foundation (基础), military, 
scientific, technological, cultural and social security as the assurance (保障)”. Report at the 20th 
National Congress of the CCP (October 2022), as translated in Ghiretti, F . (2023). Supply Chain 
Resilience: China’s Search for Vertical Integration. Institut Montaigne. https://www.institutmontaigne.
org/ressources/pdfs/publications/china-trends-17-sailing-seas-economic-security.pdf#page=10 
43 Zenglein, M. J., & Gunter, J. (2023). The Party Knows Best: Aligning Economic Actors with China’s 
Strategic Goals. MERICS. https://merics.org/en/report/party-knows-best-aligning-economic-
actors-chinas-strategic-goals 
44 Kennedy, A., & Lim, D. J. (2018). The innovation imperative: technology and US–China rivalry in the 
twenty-first century. International Affairs, 94(3), 553–572. https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiy044 
45 Automotive, telecommunications, robotics, AI, aerospace, biomedicine, etc. 
13 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperplan caused great concern in the US, fearing a significant loss in competitiveness 
and Chinese technological breakthroughs. Yet, Trump’s trade war in 2018 resulted in 
China further focusing on core technologies, industrial protection, and supply chain 
resilience. The CCP’s reference to “self-reliance” dates from the late 1930’s,46 
but Xi prioritised the objective with its dual circulation strategy in May 2020. Its 
internal dimension implied (with an increase in internal consumption) a decreased 
reliance on foreign markets and an upgrade of Chinese supply chains. Increased 
supply chain resilience is thus seen as a pivotal factor for broader economic secu-
rity, a necessary response to growing export restrictions imposed by the US, the 
EU and Japan,47 and must be reached via both vertical integration of national 
industries and strategic stockpiling of critical raw materials. Vertical integration 
is obtained either via a top-down process exploiting state owned enterprises’ role 
in the economy or via a bottom-up approach, letting private companies develop 
their own Chinese supply chain (e.g., the vertical integration of BYD’s supply chains 
allowed for 50% self-sufficiency). Strategic stockpiling has been going on since 
2012, with commercial reserves started in 2016, but some scholars highlighted 
downgrading rather than improving effects on Chinese supply chain resilience as it 
leads to greater price and market volatility during crises.48 In this direction also go 
the consolidations of the rare earth refinery sector, which happened with a series 
of mergers in December 2021,49 and of solid-state battery development, which 
officially started in January 2024 with the establishment of a consortium brin-
ging together government, academia and industry.50 In January 2023, Xi Jinping 
confirmed the importance of enhancing the competitiveness and security of supply 
chains, as well as of increasing self-reliance in science and technology, to overcome 
foreign dependencies and make China a global technological leader.51
Concerning inbound and outbound investment, China adopted in 2018 the Adminis-
trative Measures for Outbound Investment by Enterprises, providing criteria for 
investments abroad based on sensitive regions and industries. In January 2020, it 
adopted the Foreign Investment Law, aiming to supersede the “three foreign invest -
ment laws” – adopted during the Deng era for the first opening-up52 - and foreseeing 
a review mechanism for foreign direct investment (FDI) to screen investments 
potentially impacting national security. In December 2021, the updated Negative 
List for Foreign Investment Access was issued, reducing the number of sectors 
46 Long, Y. (2019). Self-reliance. In C. Sorace, I. Franceschini, & N. Loubere (Eds.), Afterlives of Chinese 
Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi (pp. 231–236). ANU Press.  
http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvk3gng9.40 
47 See note 43. 
48 Mancheri, N. A., Sprecher, B., Bailey, G., Ge, J., & Tukker, A. (2019). Effect of Chinese policies on rare 
earth supply chain resilience. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 142 , 101–112.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.11.017 
49 Chang, F . K. (2022, March 2). China’s Rare Earth Metals Consolidation and Market Power. Foreign 
Policy Research Institute. https://www.fpri.org/article/2022/03/chinas-rare-earth-metals-
consolidation-and-market-power/  
50 Tabeta, S. (2024, February 12). CATL, BYD, others unite in China for solid-state battery 
breakthrough. Nikkei Asia. https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/CATL-BYD-others-unite-
in-China-for-solid-state-battery-breakthrough 
51 Political Bureau of the CCP Central Committee. (2023, January 31). Xi Jinping Emphasizes the Need 
to Accelerate the Construction of the New Development Pattern and Enhance the Security Initiative 
in Development During the Second Collective Study Session of the Politburo of the CCP Central 
Committee. CSIS Interpret. https://interpret.csis.org/translations/xi-jinping-emphasizes-the-need-
to-accelerate-the-construction-of-the-new-development-pattern-and-enhance-the-security-
initiative-in-development-during-the-second-collective-study-session-of-the-politb/ 
52 Law on Chinese-Foreign Equity Joint Ventures (1979); Law on Foreign-funded Enterprises (1987); 
Law on Chinese-Foreign Cooperative Enterprises (1988).
14 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperwhere FDI is restricted or prohibited from 33 to 31.53 A second list applying solely 
to foreign investors that also saw a partial opening is the Negative List for Foreign 
Investment Access in Pilot Free Trade Zones, which reduced the sectors restricted 
or prohibited to FDI from 30 to 27.54 In both lists, investments were liberalised for 
automobile manufacturing and satellite television broadcast ground receiving facili-
ties,55 signalling a slight opening in the Chinese manufacturing industry. The second 
list also saw restrictions lifted in the leasing and business services industry.56 
In regard to trade restrictions, the Foreign Trade Law determined in 1994 the poli-
cies and governance system of import/export of goods and technologies, as well 
as international trade in services.57 China was slowly opening up and preparing to 
enter the WTO. The Law (further liberalised in 2004) included rules for the imposi-
tion of import/export quotas and licensing requirements.58 It was only in December 
2020, that the Export Control Law provided a comprehensive framework for mili-
tary and dual-use technologies export (and re-export) control, with a review of the 
2001 list of technologies already reviewed in 2008. The scope and rules of the list 
are vaguely formulated, which provides Chinese authorities with discretion and 
strategic ambiguity. The latest revision of the list (2023) introduced new restric -
tions on biotechnology, rare earths, photovoltaics, and autonomous vehicles, for a 
total of 139 items, of which 24 were prohibited from export and 115 facing restric -
tions. In response to the US Entity list, China drew up an Unreliable Entity list in 
September 2020, which lists foreign companies that cannot benefit from Chinese 
technology exports. An extraterritorial regulation was also added against foreign 
sanctions. After the Rules on Counteracting Unjustified Extraterritorial Application 
of Foreign Laws and Other Measures of January 2021, the Anti-Foreign Sanctions 
Law of June 2021 extends the coverage of sanctions and retaliatory measures.
Another pillar of the Chinese approach to economic security concerns data flows 
and cybersecurity, including legislation aiming to achieve “cyberspace sove-
reignty”.59 The Cybersecurity Law requires the localisation of Big Data within the 
country, and the Data Security Law of September 2021 regulates the overseas 
transfer of data related to export-controlled technologies affecting China’s national 
security. The data localisation aspect is particularly important as it concerns the 
technological competition dimension already mentioned and is thus considered 
needed to maintain the competitive advantage in technologies enabled by Big Data, 
53 China - Issued new Negative List for Foreign Direct Investment. (2022, January 1). UNCTAD 
Investment Policy Hub. https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/investment-policy-monitor/
measures/3792/issued-new-negative-list-for-foreign-direct-investment and 2022 New Rules: 
Negative List for Access of Foreign Investments of China. (2022). Kneppelhout. https://kneppelhout.
com/news/2022-new-rules-negative-list-for-access-of-foreign-investments-of-china/ 
54 China Free Trade Zones Negative List for Foreign Investment - English. (2021, December 28). China 
Briefing. https://www.china-briefing.com/news/china-free-trade-zones-negative-list-for-foreign-
investment-english/ 
55 Please note that this sector remains on the Negative List for Market Access, implying that 
regulatory approval is mandatory for both Chinese and foreign investors wishing to invest in this 
sector, see Gigler, C. (2022, February 3). New Negative Lists for Foreign Investment Access in China. 
Rödl & Partner. https://www.roedl.com/insights/negative-list-china-market-access-restriction-
foreign-investment 
56 Ibid. 
57 Godement, F ., Zhu, V., Duchatel, M., & Aguignier, P . (2021). China’s Selective Opening Up - The Case of 
Foreign Direct Investment. Institut Montaigne. https://www.institutmontaigne.org/ressources/pdfs/
publications/china-trends-11-chinas-selective-opening-case-foreign-direct-investment.pdf  
58 Ghiretti, F . (2023). From opportunity to risk: The changing economic security policies in Australia, 
China, the EU, Japan, South Korea, the UK and the US. MERICS. https://merics.org/sites/default/
files/2023-02/merics-report-changing-economic-security-policies-2023.pdf  
59 Cybersecurity Law (2016); National Intelligence Law (2018); Data Security Law (September 2021); 
Personal Information Protection Law (November 2021).
15 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperlike AI,60 as already certified in 2015 by the State Council Action Plan for Promoting 
Big Data Development.61 These efforts should also be read under the “innovation 
imperative” perspective and as instrumental in achieving greater economic security 
and self-reliance.
China also aims to increase its international partnerships via infrastructure initia-
tives and bilateral and trade agreements. In 2013, the Belt and Road Initiative was 
launched, initially promoting an improved physical connection between East Asia 
and Europe – to be achieved via Chinese infrastructural investments – and then 
expanded to Africa, Oceania, and Latin America. In 2014, China launched together 
with its BRICS partners62 the New Development Bank, created as a more inclu-
sive alternative to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Between 
2014 and 2023, China also signed bilateral trade agreements with three main direc -
tions of influence: with geographically close but politically distant regional partners 
(South Korea, Australia); with EU candidates (Serbia, Georgia); and with developing 
economies (Mauritius, Nicaragua, Ecuador). In November 2020, China also signed 
the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), including 14 Indo-Pa-
cific countries63 and representing the world’s largest share of global goods trade, 
global GDP and population.64 In September 2021, China also applied to join the 
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPT -
PP),65. A final mention should be given to the Russia-China relationship, reinforced 
over the last decade up until the “friendship without limits” declaration right before 
the Russian full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.66 
As part of its economic statecraft, during the last decade, China has also often 
imposed economic coercion on those countries with which it had disagreements, 
trying to nudge them towards positions more aligned to Chinese interests. From 
restricting rare earth exports to Japan following a territorial dispute (2010) to 
supporting consumers’ boycott of South Korean goods and services after the 
deployment of US missile defence systems in the country (2017) to the restriction 
of Lithuanian imports in China following Lithuania’s decision to open a Taiwanese 
representation in Vilnius (2021). The anti-dumping investigation launched against 
imports of French cognac (2023), is also considered a very coercive targeted res-
ponse to the alleged French support to the EU investigation on Chinese electric 
vehicles.67
60 Roberts, A., Moraes, H. C., & Ferguson, V. (2018, December 3). Geoeconomics: the Chinese Strategy 
of Technological Advancement and Cybersecurity. Lawfare. https://www.lawfaremedia.org/article/
geoeconomics-chinese-strategy-technological-advancement-and-cybersecurity  
61 State Council. (2015, September 5). Notice of the State Council on Issuing an Action Plan to Promote 
the Development of Big Data [Press release]. https://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2015-09/05/
content_10137.htm  
62 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa. 
63 Including Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Japan, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, New 
Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam
64 Cimino-Isaacs, C. D., Dolven, B., & Sutherland, M. D. (2022). Regional Comprehensive Economic 
Partnership (RCEP). Congressional Research Service. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/
IF /IF11891  
65 Including Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, New Zealand, 
Singapore and Vietnam.
66 Deng, C., Simmons, A. M., Gershkovich, E., & Mauldin, W. (2022, February 4). Putin, Xi Aim Russia-
China Partnership Against U.S. WSJ . https://www.wsj.com/articles/russias-vladimir-putin-meets-
with-chinese-leader-xi-jinping-in-beijing-11643966743?mod=article_inline 
67 Other examples include the decrease in Chinese imports of Norwegian salmon following the 
awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo in 2010, and the duties imposed on Australian wine 
in 2021 following Australia’s inquiry into the origins of Covid-19. 
16 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paper IECONOMIC SECURITY IN JAPAN: RESILIENCE THROUGH INNOVATION
A complex relationship with neighbouring China has driven the development of 
Japan’s economic security agenda. As a treaty ally of the United States, Japan is 
closely aligned with Washinton’s regional policies, and following the China-US 
détente in the late 1970s, export-oriented Japanese companies were at the 
forefront of integrating China into their regional production networks. Conse-
quently, the Chinese and Japanese economies became deeply intertwined: by the 
mid-2000s, China had become Japan’s largest trading partner, and it continues 
to be the third most important investment destination for Japanese companies.68 
However, economic integration has occurred against historical tensions stemming 
from a difficult colonial past and territorial disputes. The marked rise of Chinese 
power over the last two decades has exacerbated these pressures greatly.  
When a Chinese fishing trawler collided with two Japanese Coast Guard patrol 
boats in 2010, tensions between Japan and China escalated. The incident led to a 
diplomatic standoff, after which China restricted exports of rare earth elements to 
Japan, which highlighted the vulnerability of Japan’s supply chains.69 At the time, 
Japan relied on China for more than 80% of its rare earth imports and the episode 
catalysed discussions in Tokyo to revisit its approach to economic interdependence. 
Japan has since embarked on a multifaceted strategy to bolster its economic 
security and mitigate risks. 
Japan’s economic security policies are embedded in other major policy shifts in 
Japan’s broader national security agenda over the past decade, especially under the 
premiership of Shinzō Abe, such as the creation of a National Security Council in 
2013, the 2014 reinterpretation of Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution to include 
collective self-defence (allowing for greater international security cooperation), and 
the 2016 Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) strategy.70 These institutional turning 
points were linked to Abe’s nationalistic positions (when compared to his predeces-
sors) and intended to deal with growing Chinese power in Japan’s neighbourhood.71 
Japan had already begun in the late 2000s to use trade agreements, such as the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), to secure a more proactive role in shaping 
the future regional economic architecture.72 Japan’s trade strategy, including its 
emphasis on rule-making on international economic standards and the negotia-
tion of deep integration trade agreements, continues to be a key contributor to its 
broader economic objectives of ensuring access to foreign markets, enhancing the 
competitiveness of its global supply chains, and securing its economic future in the 
face of demographic trends and a shifting global power balance.
Following the 2010 dispute with China, Japan also began rethinking its approach 
to promoting domestic capacities to reduce its dependence on rare earths from 
China. Consequently, Japan has been a first-mover among G7 countries to develop 
68 OECD International Direct Investment Statistics 2022. (2022). OECD iLibrary. https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/finance-and-investment/oecd-international-direct-investment-statistics-2022_
deedc307-en 
69 The veracity of this account has recently been disputed by Evenett, S., & Fritz, J. (2023, July 19). 
Revisiting the China–Japan Rare Earths dispute of 2010. CEPR. https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/
revisiting-china-japan-rare-earths-dispute-2010  
70  Igata, A., & Glosserman, B. (2021). Japan’s New Economic Statecraft. The Washington Quarterly, 
44(3), 25–42. https://doi.org/10.1080/0163660x.2021.1970334 
71 Watanabe, T. (2019, October 30). Japan’s Rationale for the Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy. 
Sasakawa Peace Foundation. https://www.spf.org/iina/en/articles/watanabe_01.html  
72 Solis, M. (2017). Dilemmas of a Trading Nation: Japan and the United States in the Evolving Asia-Pacific 
Order. Brookings Institution Press. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7864/j.ctt1hfr247 
17 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Papera toolbox for economic security policies that protect the country against foreign 
influence. In the early 2010s, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) 
developed schemes to incentivise recycling and provide research funding to 
encourage the reduction and substitution of rare earths in production processes, 
which reduced dependence on rare earth imports from China from 80% to 60% 
between 2010 and 2021.73 
Moreover, the acceleration of Chinese Military-Civil Fusion policies in the 2010s 
raised concerns in Tokyo about the transfers of dual-use technologies. In response, 
Japan changed its investment screening to prevent illicit technology transfers and 
to manage the risk posed by foreign investments and personnel to protect critical 
industries and sectors. In June 2020, a revision of the Foreign Exchange and 
Foreign Trade Act lowered the threshold for regulatory approval of foreign invest -
ments from 10% to 1% and provided the government with wider leeway to assess 
potential national security threats    .74
Several institutional changes have elevated economic security issues within the 
Japanese government. The National Security Secretariat launched a new division 
focused on economic security issues in April 2020, which, with 20 staff, is its lar -
gest among a total of seven divisions.75 In February 2021, Japan’s Public Security 
Intelligence Agency (PSIA) also created a new unit to deal with technology trans-
fers .76 Prime Minister Kishida has underlined the importance he attaches to the topic 
by creating a new cabinet-level position for economic security in October 2021 
and establishing an advisory group, the Council of Experts on Economic Security 
Legislation, in  July 2022.
Concurrently, the Japanese government adopted a comprehensive economic 
security legislation in May 2022, the Economic Security Promotion Act (ESPA), 
which aims to strengthen national security through strategic economic measures 
and implements the economic security goals of Japan’s 2022 National Security 
Strategy (NSS).77 ESPA  focuses on ensuring a stable supply of critical goods, 
protecting essential infrastructure, promoting the development of critical tech-
nologies, and managing the disclosure of patent applications that could threaten 
national security. 
ESPA defines specified critical goods as ‘materials that significantly affect the exis-
tence, ordinary lives and economic activities of the Japanese public.’78 Implementing 
cabinet orders have since identified eleven products to fall under this definition: 
semiconductors, rare earths, medical supplies, fertilisers, ship parts, liquefied natural 
gas, aircraft parts, cloud applications, antimicrobials, storage batteries, industrial 
robots and machine tools.79 Competent government ministries are instructed and 
firms encouraged to develop plans for the stable supply of these products through a 
reinforcement of the production base, a diversification of supply sources, stockpiling, 
73 See note 71. 
74 Japan’s revisions to the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Act mark a significant shift in Japan’s 
oversight of foreign investment. (2020, July 13). Hogan Lovells. https://www.hoganlovells.com/en/
publications/japans-revisions-to-the-foreign-exchange-and-foreign-trade-act 
75 See note 71. 
76 Ibid.
77 Outline of the Economic Security Promotion Act. https://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/
outline/75/905R403.pdf ; National Security Strategy. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan.  
https://www.mofa.go.jp/fp/nsp/page1we_000081.html 
78 Articles 6 to 48 of ESPA.
79 Asahina, H. (2022, December 21). Japan seeks to release rare earths, 10 other critical items from 
China’s grip. Nikkei Asia. https://asia.nikkei.com/Spotlight/Supply-Chain/ Japan-seeks-to-release-
rare-earths-10-other-critical-items-from-China-s-grip  
18 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperthe development of production technologies, and the development of alternative 
products.80 Businesses producing or importing specified critical goods can apply for 
government grants and other financing to implement these plans.81
ESPA defines essential infrastructure as services whose disruption ‘could pose a 
large risk to the security of the nation and its citizens’.82 Draft implementing rules 
identify eleven essential infrastructure sectors: electricity distribution; gas pipe-
lines; railways and cargo transport; air transport and airports; telecommunications; 
terrestrial broadcasting; postal service; banking, fund transfer, insurances and 
financial markets; and payment systems.83 Essential infrastructure services are 
subject to risk assessment screenings from the government. In case competent 
ministries assess a high risk from foreign suppliers, competent ministries will issue 
recommendations to change the installation or maintenance of essential infrastruc -
ture services.84 
ESPA also supports the development of critical technologies to achieve ‘strategic 
indispensability’ in sectors where Japan has the potential to have a global com-
petitive advantage and control chokepoints in technology value chains.85 The 
Japanese government has identified twenty designated critical technologies 
(DCTs) in which it wants to achieve such a global lead: biotechnology; medical 
and public health technology; artificial intelligence and machine learning; advanced 
computing; microprocessor and semiconductor technology; data science, analysis, 
storage and management; advanced engineering and manufacturing technology; 
robotics; quantum information science; advanced surveillance, positioning and sen-
sing technology; neurocomputing and brain interface technology; advanced energy 
and energy storage technology; advanced information, communication and networ -
king technology; cybersecurity; space technology, marine technology; transport 
technology; hypersonics; chemical, biological, radiation and nuclear technology; 
and advanced materials science.86 ESPA also designates that a newly established 
Research Institute for Technological Studies will survey technological deve-
lopments in DCT sectors, and public-private cooperation councils for DCTs will 
determine research directions.87 Firms in these sectors are supported through 
dedicated government funding.88 
Lastly, ESPA proposes a system for the non-disclosure of patent applications 
for sensitive technologies.89 A draft proposal from the government includes a list 
of military, space, and nuclear technologies that would fall under this system.90 
ESPA instructs the Japan Patent Office to forward  patent applications in the desi-
gnated technology fields to the Cabinet Office, which conducts a review based on 
detrimental national security implications and the industry impact due to non-dis-
80 See note 78, Outline of the Economic Security Promotion Act. 
81 Ibid.
82 Ibid.
83 Concepts for Designation Criteria for Specific Social Infrastructure Projects and Operators in the 
System Ensuring the Stable Provision of Specific Social Infrastructure Services (Draft). (2023). 
https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/seisaku/keizai_anzen_hosyohousei/r5_dai5/siryou8.pdf  
84 See note 78, Outline of the Economic Security Promotion Act. 
85 Ibid.
86 Suzuki, K. (2023, May 9). How Will the Economic Security Law Change Japan’s Sci-Tech Policy? 
The Tokyo Foundation for Policy Research. https://www.tokyofoundation.org/research/detail.
php?id=943 
87 Ibid.
88 Japanese Cabinet Office. (2023). Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and Reform. 
https://www5.cao.go.jp/keizai-shimon/kaigi/cabinet/honebuto/2023/decision0616.html 
89 See note 78, Outline of the Economic Security Promotion Act. 
90 Progress of studies into the operation of the closed system for patent applications. (2023).  
https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/seisaku/keizai_anzen_hosyohousei/r5_dai7/siryou3.pdf ; ESPA specifies 
a full legal guideline for the non-disclosure of patent applications to be released by May 2024. 
19 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperclosure. The Cabinet Office will then notify the patent applicant and prohibit the 
disclosure of invention details, obligate safe handling of invention information, 
require approval for sharing the invention with other businesses, prohibit a patent 
filing in other countries, and compensate the patent applicant for losses due to this 
procedure.91
Japan has also recently tightened its export controls on dual-use items. Fol-
lowing consultations with the United States and the Netherlands, it added 23 items 
related to advanced semiconductor manufacturing equipment (cleaning, deposi-
tion, annealing, lithography, etching, and inspection equipment) to its control list in 
March 2023. The list is applicable to all destinations to prevent the proliferation of 
sensitive technologies through third countries. Moreover, in September 2022 Japan 
issued voluntary guidelines for enhancing export controls of goods and technology 
that could be misused and lead to serious human rights violations or abuses. In 
addition, Japan has notification requirements for outbound investment in fisheries, 
weapons, narcotics and leather goods, and is therefore one of the few countries to 
have pioneered outward FDI controls (which are currently championed by the US).
Japan has recently joined new partnerships to diversify its supply chains, such 
as the Supply Chain Resilience Initiative (SCRI), a trilateral grouping with Aus-
tralia and India, which aims to share best practices on supply chain resilience and 
encourage the diversification of supply chains through investments  , and the US-led 
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF). Finally, Japan is actively 
participating in global efforts to counter economic coercion and ensure the security 
of supply chains, such as the G7’s “Coordination Platform on Economic Coercion”, 
to facilitate a collective response against economic coercion. 
 IECONOMIC SECURITY IN THE EU: LEVERAGING THE SINGLE MARKET FOR 
COLLECTIVE STRENGTH
The Biden administration’s pressure on the Dutch company ASML to ban the sale 
of certain semiconductor manufacturing equipment to China was a decisive factor 
in the European Commission’s announcement that it would develop a European 
economic security strategy in March 2023. However, the institutional security 
architecture of the EU is very different from that of the US, China or Japan. In the 
EU, security remains largely a national competence, and the commitment to risk 
reduction varies as much as the tools adopted by member states. The lack of coor -
dination makes each member more vulnerable to foreign influence or economic 
coercion, with repercussions across the Single Market. The economic security 
strategy presented on 20 June, 2023,92 thus marks a doctrinal shift. While conti-
nuing to support fair competition rules for the stability of the global system, the EU 
cannot maintain its basic market openness stance without a de-risking strategy.
The EU only linked security and economic policy when the Trump administration 
launched trade wars on several fronts and sharply reduced its commitment to the 
World Trade Organisation (WTO), in particular by blocking the Appellate Body of 
its dispute settlement system, which forced Brussels to anticipate the risks asso-
ciated with offensive unilateral actions. In addition to adopting the FDI screening 
regulation in March 2019, the emphasis on “open strategic autonomy” defines 
the goal of maintaining the EU’s ability to act autonomously without resorting 
to protectionism. It paved the way for a comprehensive approach to economic 
security illustrated by three pillars: promote, protect, and partner. The mantra “as 
91 See note 78, Outline of the Economic Security Promotion Act. 
92 An EU approach to enhance economic security. (2023, June 20). European Commission.  
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_3358 
20 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperopen as possible, as closed as necessary” remains the cornerstone of what can 
be considered an “open” economic security strategy. However, while the European 
approach to partnerships is clearly distinct from that of the US, its strategic auto-
nomy is narrower when it comes to building the promotion and protection pillars. On 
the one hand, the EU risks lagging behind the massive financial capabilities of the 
US and China in enhancing production capacity, while on the other, its calibration of 
the “protection” pillar risks being subject to strong external pressure to align itself 
with the measures of so-called trusted countries (such as the control of outward 
investment, which Washington has strongly advocated).
Partnering, however, is a comparative advantage of the EU’s economic strategy. 
In the new era of economic coercion, excessive dependence is a vulnerability shared 
worldwide. In fact, EU economic growth depends more on external demand when 
compared with the US. The EU also has fewer natural resources than the US, and 
its value chains are more deeply integrated with the Chinese economy. While the 
US Congress has given up on new market opening and supports protectionist mea-
sures that infringe the multilateral rules of the World Trade Organisation, the EU 
emphasises keeping global supply chains open. Its trade agreements support diver -
sification and shape standards, actions which further contribute to strengthening 
EU competitiveness and security of supply. Following the EU-Japan trade agree-
ment (2019) and the agreements with New Zealand (2022) and Chile (2023), 
efforts to conclude an agreement with Mercosur or Australia are coupled with the 
relaunch of other bilateral negotiations (with India in June 2022 and with individual 
ASEAN countries). The EU-US Trade and Technology Council, launched in June 
2021 to discuss a large scope of global and bilateral issues, addresses many eco-
nomic security-related issues. The EU’s Global Gateway Initiative (2021), followed 
by G7 coordination through the Partnership for Global Infrastructure Investment 
(2022), proposed sustainable alternatives to investment practices that expose 
partners to the coercive behaviour of their creditors, while supporting the diversifi-
cation of European supply chains. However, the visibility of these initiatives and the 
EU’s ability to attract private investment need to be strengthened.
The “promote” pillar aims to strengthen the competitiveness and growth of the 
EU by enhancing its scientific, technological, and industrial bases. It has been sup-
ported since the launch of the Green Deal (2019) by increased investment in the 
green and digital transitions through the July 2020 NextGenerationEU package 
(€800 billion recovery instrument) and incentives for the private sector to invest 
in the pillars of the EU industrial strategy (May 2021) such as the Acts on Chips 
(September 2023), Critical Raw Materials (December 2023), and the Net Zero 
Industry Act (February 2024). The massive investment by the Biden Administra-
tion in the domestic industry led the EU to shift in March 2023 to an unprecedented 
but temporary relaxation of state aid (Transition Framework to further support the 
transition towards a net-zero economy). The high level of concern about energy 
security caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine accelerated the adoption of 
these initiatives to increase renewable energy production in the EU. However, the 
failure to agree on significant funding for the Strategic Technologies for Europe 
(STEP) platform, with only €1.5 billion to support the development and produc -
tion of strategic technologies (clean technologies, advanced technologies, digital 
technologies and biotechnologies), reflects the reluctance of member states to 
commit to a European industrial policy. The Commission’s January 2024 economic 
security package does not address the need for major public or private funding 
for early-stage, capital-intensive critical technology projects.93 The EU continues 
to lack a strategy for serious innovation funding. In an era of economic security, 
93 Commission proposes new initiatives to strengthen economic security. (2024, January 24). European 
Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_24_363 
21 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperthe Single Market cannot simply be built on strict competition rules. It should 
be seen as a space of capacity mutualisation. Acknowledging that the investment 
of a member state benefits the entire Single Market and that for certain strategic 
supplies, it is better to rely on another member state than on certain third countries 
would be a notable change in economic doctrine.
Additionally, at the turn of 2024, the EU’s diversification of critical minerals supply, 
notably with an objective of domestic refinery capacity, is hindered by China’s 
December 2023 ban on exports of rare earth refinery technologies and Beijing’s 
attempt to blackmail the EU to choose between the green transition and protectio-
nism. The EU has adopted a country-agnostic approach to economic security that 
is coherent with its alignment on multilateral rules based on non-discrimination. 
However, the concentration of manufacturing for clean technology components 
in China makes it challenging for the EU to accelerate its own manufacturing of 
technologies for domestic renewable energy production, while China intends to 
keep access to the European market to flow out its overcapacity of clean tech. The 
Chinese anti-dumping investigation on French brandy imports, thus targeting the 
luxury sector that was not seen as a priority for a de-risking strategy focused on 
technologies, is intended to prevent the European Commission from concluding its 
anti-subsidy investigation on Chinese electric vehicles imports with higher tariffs, 
or Beijing would take more aggressive unilateral measures. Therefore, building the 
“protect” pillar of the economic security strategy without resorting to protectio-
nism requires careful calibration.
In March 2023, Ursula von der Leyen underlined that the EU wants to “de-risk but 
not to decouple”.94 De-risking is about protecting from high risks. It, in turn, led 
the Biden Administration to distance itself from a decoupling rhetoric. While Was-
hington calls for partners to align to avoid circumvention of its tech export bans 
and leverage their impact, the priority for the Europeans remains to guard against 
competition distortions hindering the resilience of their supply chains.
The “protect ” pillar of the EU’s strategy is thus first building upon the new auto-
nomous trade defence instruments recently adopted. When the US blocked the 
Appellate Body of the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism, it amplified the risks of 
trade distorting practices. The EU, along with Japan and others, supported the esta-
blishment of a Multi-Party Interim Appellate Arbitration (MPIA) agreement. But the 
new set of autonomous trade defence instruments complementing the FDI scree-
ning now enables the EU to take unilateral measures to protect the Single Market: 
the International Procurement Instrument (IPI) in June 2022, the Foreign Sub-
sidies Regulation (FSR) in July 2023, and the anti-coercion instrument (ACI) in 
December 2023. Adopting these instruments has given new competencies to the 
European Commission, but they will prove efficient only if member states ensure 
the necessary political support for their use. The reservations of certain member 
states regarding the ACI, which have led to the determination of coercion being 
entrusted to the Council, are just as likely to diminish the instrument’s deterrent 
effect if there is insufficient political support. But a foreign policy instrument voted 
on by qualified majority still shows progress and some, albeit limited, willingness on 
the part of member states to cede competences.
The EU is constrained to a defensive posture against US and Chinese initiatives 
to consolidate this pillar. New initiatives are also largely limited to incentivising 
member states to coordinate their efforts to avoid gaps in the overall infrastruc -
94 Speech by President von der Leyen on EU-China relations to the Mercator Institute for China Studies 
and the European Policy Centre. (2023, March 30). European Commission. 
 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/speech_23_2063 
22 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperture of European economic security. Consequently, the Commission’s January 
2024 economic security package builds on the existing framework of FDI screening 
regulation to call for faster harmonisation among member states (a shift from a 
voluntary to a mandatory approach, compelling all member states in a new legis-
lative proposal to establish a control mechanism, with harmonised risk factors and 
rules, and an expansion of the scope to cover intra-EU investments). Lessons learned 
since implementing FDI screening are now used to promote early harmonisation of 
new national tools. If the Commission cannot encroach on member states’ com-
petencies, it intends to play an active role in building a shared culture of risk 
assessment by encouraging member states to conduct their own risk assessments 
and to engage in a process allowing for progressive convergence. The process must 
be highly inclusive to involve businesses closely. However, while remaining faithful 
to the Community’s functional method of incremental steps, harmonising national 
systems cannot proceed quickly enough to withstand external pressure if economic 
security issues – such as export controls on dual-use goods – are not raised to the 
appropriate political level.
The Regulation on dual-use export controls was revised in 2021, focusing on sen-
sitive emerging technologies. In October 2023, the Commission presented a list 
of ten critical technology areas, inviting member states to assess the risks of 
knowledge leakage for four of them: advanced semiconductors, artificial intelli-
gence, quantum computing, biotechnologies.95 The forum announced for 2024 to 
discuss dual-use export controls at the European level should encourage member 
states to coordinate this assessment at the national level in advance. The Commis-
sion will also propose a recommendation on voluntary notifications about national 
export controls in the early summer of 2024, and the evaluation of the current EU 
regulation is anticipated at the beginning of 2025. The efficacy of these export 
controls would also be reinforced by outbound investment controls, which have 
been strongly suggested by Washington and are already planned by Japan. While 
member states and businesses have expressed strong reluctance against such a 
control measure, the Commission is even more cautious in calibrating this instru-
ment, with a two-year timeline planned: a public consultation on data gathering 
issues (January-April 2024), followed by a Recommendation to the member states 
(summer 2024) and a risk assessment report (summer 2025), will finally lead to a 
Commission proposal (autumn 2025).
The January 2024 package emphasises the security of research on technolo-
gies with dual-use potential to avoid technology leaks that could lead to increased 
strategic dependencies or erosion of the EU’s technological advantage. A white 
paper on dual-use research includes an extension of guidance for Horizon 2020 
programs to member states’ funding agencies and academic institutions and the 
extension of control to cooperation with actors based in the EU but controlled by 
unreliable countries. A Council Recommendation proposal aimed at enhancing 
research security suggests the creation of a “European Center of Expertise on 
Research Security” tasked with combating foreign interference in R&D. It would 
aim to raise awareness of the risks associated with sharing sensitive knowledge and 
technology that a foreign research partner may direct towards military purposes, 
foreign influence on EU higher education and academic research, and the use of 
technologies to undermine the EU’s fundamental values. Finally, the protection of 
strategic infrastructures has led to a Council Recommendation (December 2022) 
to strengthen the resilience of critical infrastructures and to adopt a Cyber Resi-
lience Act (December 2024).
95 Commission recommends carrying out risk assessments on four critical technology areas: advanced 
semiconductors, artificial intelligence, quantum, biotechnologies. (2023, October 3). European 
Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_4735 
23 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperTABLE 1.  Key economic security initiatives by country
United States China Japan European Union
Objective Global leadership Regime security Rules-based, open world 
economyRules-based, open world economy
Key document  The Sources of American 
Power: A Foreign Policy 
for a Changed World 
(November 2023)Overall National Security 
Outlook (April 2014)Economic Security Promotion 
Act (May 2022)Economic Security Strategy (June 
2023)
Promote • Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs 
Act
• CHIPS and Science Act
• Inflation Reduction Act
• Executive orders on 
supply chains• Made in China 2025
• Dual circulation strategy
• Vertical integration
• Consolidation of rare earth 
refinery sector 
• Consolidation of the solid-
state battery production• Recycling schemes and 
research funding (METI)
• Development of critical 
technologies
• ‘Strategic indispensability’• Green deal
• NextGenEU 
• EU Industrial Strategy
• Chips Act
• Relaxation of state aid rules
• Critical Raw Materials Act
• Net Zero Industry Act
• STEP
Protect • Inbound and outbound 
investment screening 
(CFIUS)
• Export controls for 
dual-use goods, 
critical and emerging 
technologies (BIS)
• Cybersecurity and 
infrastructure (NHS & 
CISA)• Inbound and outbound 
investment screening
• Export controls  for dual-use 
goods, critical and emerging 
technologies
• Blocking regulations against 
foreign laws
• Cyberspace sovereignty • Inbound investment 
screening
• Tightened export controls on 
dual-use items
• Disclosure of patent 
applications threatening 
national security
• Critical infrastructure• Inbound investment screening
• Export controls on dual-use items
• Risk assessments on critical 
technologies
• International procurement instrument
• Foreign subsidies regulation
• Anti-coercion instrument
• Cybersecurity and critical 
infrastructures 
Partner • Japan-US trade 
agreement
• Blue Dot Network
• Partnership for 
Global Infrastructure 
Investments
• TTC
• IPEF• Belt and Road Initiative
• New Development Bank
• RCEP
• Russia-China friendship 
without limits• Trade agreements with US 
and EU
• CPTPP
• RCEP
• Supply Chain Resilience 
Initiative
• IPEF
• G7 Coordination platform on 
economic coercion• Trade agreements with Japan, New 
Zealand, Chile
• TTC
• Global Gateway initiative
• Partnership for Global Infrastructure 
Investments
24 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paper Conclusion 
 ICRISIS MANAGEMENT AND LONG-TERM STRATEGIES
The overall picture of the economic security strategies and policies of the US, China, 
Japan and the EU shows the extent to which states have intervened to protect their 
economies from the weaponization of interdependence. The timeline of initiatives 
across countries in Figure 1 show an emulation effect, whereas countries adopted 
de-risking measures akin to their counterparts. The additional export restrictions 
announced by China at the end of 2023 indicate a negative spiral of economic 
coercion mechanisms that could lead to a balkanisation of global supply chains 
into regional blocs. However, it is still difficult to anticipate the impact of current 
developments, and the cumulative effect of supply disruptions, bottlenecks and 
widening innovation gaps. The potential damage to the competitiveness of the EU, 
which heavily dependent on global value chains, explains the cautious calibration of 
its strategy and why the EU, together with Japan, another open economy, supports 
the need for multilateral dialogue on anticipated risks (such as a subsidy war) or 
unforeseen risks caused by the de-risking strategies of major players. In addition, 
democracies have less scope than autocracies to pass on the costs of risk reduction 
to their citizens and may face additional risks of social unrest.
A comparative analysis shows that the timing of measures differs for each actor. The 
“Protect” pillar of the EU strategy, which has been the driving force for a common 
European approach, allows for a discussion of both timing and effectiveness. The US 
and China have a much older economic statecraft tradition in designing export 
and investment controls. This dimension implies not only already existing legal 
tools but also the existence of governance systems and knowledgeable human 
resources . These elements clearly impact the effectiveness of the measures put in 
place and the capacity of public administrations to manage them. The simple fact that 
the EU is not a single sovereign state has implications not only on the governance 
aspect – i.e. the fact of having 27 different administrations with different political 
cultures – but also on the actual nature of the measures per se. Indeed, the only 
binding legal text produced under the “protect” pillar is the update of the FDI regu-
lation proposed on 24 January. Thus, the “protect” dimension is simultaneously 
propelling and hindering the development of a joint European economic security 
approach. Propelling as that has been the core of the strategy presented in June 
2023, with initiatives under the “promote” and “partner” dimensions mostly preda-
ting the adoption of the strategy. Hindering as it touches upon competencies and 
prerogatives of the member states, with the consequence of significantly delaying 
the set-up of a relevant European economic security governance (e.g., see the len-
gthy consultation foreseen for a potential outbound FDI screening mechanism). 
The EU’s institutional organisation may also have more profound political impli-
cations. Europeans continue to struggle to develop a long-term strategy 
corresponding to the “Union interest”. The Anti-Coercion Instrument (ACI) merely 
presents a process for determining the “Union interest” based on a precautionary 
approach to possible hindrances rather than any tentative definition.96 However, the 
de-risking strategies of the US and China correspond to long-term strategies with 
a profound impact on the framework of economic competitiveness underpinned 
96 Article 9 of ACI on the determination of the “Union interest” mentions that “those interests include 
primarily the preservation of the ability of the Union and its Member States to make legitimate 
sovereign choices free from economic coercion, and all other interests of the Union or the Member 
States specific to the case, the interests of Union economic operators, including upstream and 
downstream industries, and the interests of Union final consumers affected or potentially affected 
by the economic coercion or by Union response measures.”
25 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperby globalisation. US trade restrictions aimed at preserving a technological advan-
tage are leading to a profound transformation of markets. The European economic 
security strategy is instead born out of defensive crisis management.
The realisation of the need for a joint European approach for export controls, FDI 
screening, and supply chain resilience led to the creation of the strategy, with 
the merging of the “promote” and “partner” pillars into the newly designed “pro-
tect” one. Yet, a significant difference also exists between these two others. While 
partnership has always been a key feature of EU initiatives, thanks to the exclu-
sive competence of the European Commission in commercial policy, promoting 
industrial development has always been a member state competence, with the few 
initiatives launched at the EU level always characterised by a structural lack of fun-
ding (see, for example, the Strategic Technologies for Europe Platform - STEP).
The “promote” and “partner” dimensions also highlight striking differences from 
the other analysed countries. While several estimates97 consider that the funding 
of the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) is comparable to the overall financial volume 
of various programs already launched by the EU and its member states to achieve 
climate objectives and facilitate the green transition, policies aimed at promoting 
technological innovation in the US and China are competitive on another level, both 
in terms of funding and scale. This underscores the absolute priority of actively 
completing and deepening the Single market to improve the competitiveness of 
European economies and their innovation capacity. The publication in 2024 of the 
Letta Report on the future of the Single Market and the Draghi Report on European 
competitiveness should receive strong political support from the Commission 
and, most importantly, from the member states. This could create momentum to 
resume those unfinished initiatives (for example, the Capital Markets Union) that 
would significantly benefit and upgrade the EU’s “promote” pillar.
The EU should also draw inspiration from Japan’s approach of “strategic indis-
pensability”. While the EU, like Japan, depends on technologies where the US and 
China have acquired leading (AI, supercomputing, digital, etc.) or even monopo-
listic positions (rare earth refinery), it can rebalance this excessive dependence 
by investing, as Japan intends to do, in niche leadership enhancing its “technolo-
gical indispensability” (such as ASML). The EU could leverage this new strategic 
approach to interdependence98 even more, given its larger domestic market com-
pared to Japan’s, allowing it to wield greater influence in this more targeted power 
dynamic. Moreover, Japan and the EU share a desire to promote fair competition 
and have an incentive to strengthen their partnership if protectionism in the United 
States continues to rise.
Furthermore, the EU’s ability to negotiate partnerships is an asset it currently 
holds vis-à-vis the US and one that it must actively consolidate by better consi-
dering the expectations of its partners. The challenges faced in finalising the trade 
agreement with Mercosur and gaining the support of European public opinions 
97 The US Inflation Reduction Act: How the EU is affected and how it should react. (2023, October 17). 
CEPR. https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/us-inflation-reduction-act-how-eu-affected-and-how-
it-should-react, and Kleimann, D. et al (2023, February 23) How Europe Should answer the US 
Inflation Reduction Act, Bruegel.
98 Gehrke, T., & Ringhof, J. (2023, September 12). Indispensable leverage: How the EU can build its 
technological edge. ECFR. https://ecfr.eu/article/indispensable-leverage-how-the-eu-can-build-
its-technological-edge/ ; Baverez, D., Fabry, E., & Köhler-Suzuki, N. (2023). Rebalancing trade 
dependency on China: de-risking scenarios by 2035. In Bermann, S. & Fabry, E. (edited by) EU and 
China between De-Risking and Cooperation: Scenarios by 2035 (Report n.126, pp. 54–64). Jacques 
Delors Institute. https://institutdelors.eu/en/publications/eu-and-china-between-de-risking-and-
cooperation-scenarios-by-2035/ 
26 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Papercall for adjusting the format of these negotiations, while China itself expands its 
international partnerships through various initiatives, despite the “debt trap” and 
numerous complaints filed against it at the WTO. The US suspended most of its 
trade partnership efforts after Trump’s arrival, and its global infrastructure deve-
lopment initiatives have yet to yield significant results. Even a forum like the TTC 
struggles to produce concrete outcomes despite facilitating transatlantic dia-
logue. The EU has always acted according to its values and messages, supporting 
multilateral institutions, rules-based international trade and least-developed and 
developing countries. However, criticisms targeting the extraterritorial dimension 
of its sustainability regulations limit its ability to form new partnerships.99 The 
new security dimension of today’s envisaged partnerships (notably for access to 
critical raw materials), including through more targeted ad hoc agreements, calls for 
a rethink of the “Brussels effect” to better integrate the impact of EU regulations 
on third countries and to prioritise a win-win principle that facilitates partnerships.
 IRECOMMENDATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC SECURITY GOVERNANCE TO 
ENHANCE UNITY BETWEEN MEMBER STATES
The Commission has elevated the stakes to the right strategic level, the Single 
Market, which is the Union’s main asset for economic security. It has adopted 
a comprehensive narrative that gives coherence to the project while emphasising 
excessive risks to differentiate between de-risking and competitiveness clearly. 
Economic security comes at a cost, and administrations and businesses cannot be 
overwhelmed. However, enhancing the EU’s economic competitiveness remains a 
significant factor in risk reduction, and this risk-based approach of the outgoing 
Commission could lead to streamlining the economic security objective in broader 
European policies, such as in the financial or food sector. Developing a European 
economic security strategy will be a long-term project at the heart of the next Com-
mission’s mandate for 2024-2029, as the scale advantage of the US and China 
relying on centralised economic statecraft suggests that exploiting the full poten-
tial of the Single Market requires a political leap forward. The EU must equip itself 
with more delegated competences and agencies, such as the US DARPA (Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency) or OF AC (Office of Foreign Asset Control), a 
shared intelligence capacity on vulnerabilities and competitive advantages, a signi-
ficant investment capacity in innovation, and harmonised defence tools against the 
leakage of technological know-how.
In order to deepen the Single Market, the Commission wants to guide the member 
states towards a common assessment of the new risks arising from a more conflic -
tual international environment. This can be achieved through a consultation process 
that mobilises bottom-up expertise and is gradually adjusted. While the Commis-
sion has nudged member states to carry out individual risk assessments, national 
capitals have been slow to establish inter-ministerial coordination mechanisms 
that would speed up the process. In most cases, efforts are isolated within specific 
ministries without a framework for inter-departmental collaboration. The varied 
backgrounds of member state representatives in the Outbound Investment Control 
Expert Group illustrate the different national approaches to economic security and 
the broad spectrum of required expertise required, such as investment, enginee-
ring, and cybersecurity.
99 Lamy, P ., Pons, G., Van Der Ven, C., & Azevedo, C. (2023). EU trade and the environment: Development 
as the missing side of the triangle. Europe Jacques Delors. https://www.europejacquesdelors.eu/
publications/greening-trade-14  
27 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy PaperTime is of the essence, and in order to quickly establish a shared risk assessment 
culture, it is imperative to set up a support infrastructure that encourages the deve-
lopment of bottom-up expertise and engages the member states.100
• Creating a Commissioner for Economic Security:
 The next Commission President should appoint a Commissioner with a horizontal 
portfolio on economic security. In addition to facilitating the coordination of ini-
tiatives and ensuring policy coherence, this would help keep the issue high on the 
agenda and maintain the commitment of national governments. Regular visits to 
all Member States to maintain an ongoing dialogue with national governments, 
national parliaments and stakeholders (business, trade unions, and NGOs) would 
help to maintain a continental perspective.
• Establishing an Economic Security Council within the EU Council:
 Simultaneously, there should be a push to create a format for an Economic Secu-
rity Council within the EU Council, encouraging all member states to create the 
position of Minister for Economic Security. This would promote inter-ministerial 
coordination on economic security issues within each member state.
• Reviewing the Strategic compass: 
 A revision of the EEAS’s Strategic Compass as the doctrinal basis for the EU’s 
economic security strategy: the common approach to the security and defence 
threats and challenges facing the Union agreed in 2022 should be used to bring 
member states on board with a common economic risk culture. The next Commis-
sion term should also be used to forge closer links between the Commission and 
the EEAS, which remain far too distant.
• Launching a one-stop shop on economic security on the Commission’s web 
page:
 A comprehensive overview of all (past and future) initiatives related to the 
Economic Security Strategy is key to ensure ownership by all stakeholders. 
A dedicated page on the European Commission’s website (a ‘one-stop-shop’) 
should provide access to this information and allow progress to be tracked. In 
addition to EU-level initiatives, it would present member states’ regulations 
related to economic security (such as export controls or inward investment) and 
the relevant national authorities. For companies operating in different member 
states, this would make it easier to raise awareness of economic security issues 
at different levels of management. This would make the differences in regula-
tions and resources between member states more visible and help to promote 
the exchange of best practices.
• Establishing a Forum on Economic Security:
 The European Commission’s consultation procedures (e.g. on critical technologies 
or the control of outbound investment) should be complemented by the establi-
shment of a High Level Economic Security Forum. The White Paper on Export 
Controls proposes the creation of a High Level Forum “to discuss export controls 
developments and foster a common EU position”. Such a forum should cover all 
issues related to economic security and aim to bring together representatives 
of member states and companies to adapt the risk assessment methodology. 
Businesses are at the frontline of de-risking and need to be closely involved. The 
Forum would help identify subsets of critical technologies, analyse the diffusion 
of shocks across supply chains, assess the impact of sanctions, allocate the costs 
100 Some recommendations were drawn from an expert seminar on the European Economic Security 
Strategy, jointly organised by the Jacques Delors Institute and the Clingendael Institute  in Paris on 
10 October 2023.
28 • Jacques Delors Institute • Policy Paperof de-risking between producers, consumers and taxpayers, and identify addi-
tional side effects.
 Beyond initial assessments of critical dependencies based on customs data, 
effective monitoring would require companies to share certain data. They would 
be incentivised to do so if they could benefit from this collective intelligence to 
anticipate potential shocks in their supply chains. The Forum would also help to 
identify the relevant data needed to assess risks, including at the micro level of 
companies, and to prepare the technological infrastructure to provide sufficient 
confidentiality for a public-private partnership with the European Commission on 
data sharing.
 The Forum could pave the way for the creation of a European Agency for Eco-
nomic Security to develop analytical tools for continuous monitoring and 
long-term foresight to better anticipate future risks.101 
A shared understanding of the economic security issues should also be built with 
global partners.
• Adding economic security to the WTO agenda: 
 Notwithstanding the difficulties in advancing the WTO agenda, a debate on eco-
nomic security issues should be launched at the 14th Ministerial Conference in 
Cameroon in 2026. The issue must be discussed in international fora to increase 
the legitimacy of these concerns and to clarify that reducing over-dependence 
should not be seen as a hostile act but rather as an action aimed at increasing the 
stability and resilience of the system. This would include discussing critical tech-
nologies and their potential impacts, as agreed by the US and China on AI following 
their November 2023 summit in San Francisco; how to reduce and avoid restric -
tions on the flow of critical minerals and green technologies, two key elements 
in the fight for climate resilience and technological development of developing 
countries; and a joint risk assessment of emerging dual-use technologies. The 
debate should also emphasise that the right approach to addressing economic 
security concerns is country-agnostic and that some measures are aimed at 
levelling the playing field rather than being hostile actions directed at specific 
countries. More balanced trade relations should enhance rather than undermine 
the security of the system. Actions by other countries to reduce potentially dan-
gerous over-dependencies should be encouraged while reinforcing the idea that 
these should take place within the WTO and reinforce a rules-based world order. 
Finally, it would seek to anticipate the negative impact of some economic secu-
rity measures, particularly on developing countries.
• Adding economic security to the G20 agenda:
 Discussions on economic security issues should take place not only amongst the 
G7, but also within the G20 framework, in order to increase the legitimacy of eco-
nomic security and reduce tensions, particularly between “Western” countries 
and the “Global South”. The G20 forum would also allow for frank discussions 
with China and middle powers that share their concerns. 
101 This European Agency on Economic Security would have similar functions as the standing EU 
Economic Security Council (EU-ESC) proposed by Swieboda, P ., & Riekeles, G. (2024). Europe’s 
Make-or-Break Moment Putting Economic Security at the Heart of the EU’s 2024-2029 Strategic 
Agenda. European Policy Centre. https://www.epc.eu/en/publications/Europes-make-or-break-
moment-Putting-economic-security-at-the-heart~57d26c 
Managing Editor: Sylvie Matelly • The document may 
be reproduced in part or in full on the dual condition 
that its meaning is not distorted and that the source 
is mentioned  • The views expressed are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
publisher • The Jacques Delors Institute cannot be held 
responsible for the use which any third party may make 
of the document • Original version • Edited by Marjolaine 
Bergonnier • © Notre Europe - Jacques Delors InstituteNotre Europe - Institut Jacques Delors
Penser l’Europe • Thinking Europe • Europa Denken
18 rue de Londres 75009 Paris, France • www.delorsinstitute.eu
T +33 (0)1 44 58 97 97 • info@delorsinstitute.eu
This project is funded by the European Commission’s 
Citizens, Equality, Rights and Values Programme (CERV) 
under project number 101104850 ― IJD 2024.
