11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 1/17Geopolitical fragmentation risks and
international currencies
By Tamar den Besten, Paola Di Casola, Maurizio Michael Habib
Published as part of the .
Shortly after Russia invaded Ukraine, several packages of unprecedented sanctions were imposed on
Russia, including the freezing of nearly half of the Russian central bank’s foreign exchange reserves
and the exclusion of a number of Russian banks from SWIFT, the dominant financial messaging
system used to facilitate cross-border payments. Several observers noted that these sanctions may
have far-reaching consequences for the role of the currencies of the sanctioning countries – including
the US dollar and the euro – in the international monetary and financial system. According to these
observers, countries that are not fully aligned geopolitically with the United States might reduce their
exposures to the currencies of sanctioning countries going forward. However, other observers have
been more cautious and pointed to challenges involved in diversifying from the major international
currencies. This special feature sheds light on this debate by reviewing the available evidence on the
effects of geopolitical fragmentation risks on the use of international currencies. It shows that evidence
of potential fragmentation in the international monetary system since Russia’s invasion has so far been
mainly restricted to announcements and specific cases rather than pointing to broader trends.
Anecdotal evidence, including official statements, points to intentions of some countries to develop the
use of alternatives to major traditional currencies, such as the Chinese renminbi, the Russian rouble or
the Indian rupee for invoicing international trade. There is also evidence that Russia has been using
the Chinese renminbi to a significantly greater extent for international invoicing and cross-border
payments in the past few months. However, the available data do not show substantial changes in the
use of international currencies as yet. One exception is evidence of increased accumulation of gold as
an alternative reserve asset, possibly driven by countries geopolitically closer to China and Russia.
1 Overview of the debate on the impact of geopolitical
fragmentation risks on the international monetary system
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine might represent a watershed for the future of globalisation and
the international monetary system. Several observers have argued that Russia’s invasion has
opened a new chapter for the global economy and geopolitics, contributing inter alia to geo-economic
fragmentation – a reduction in the degree of economic and multilateral integration and cooperation.[]
Supply chain networks could be re-oriented towards geopolitical allies (a process known as
friendshoring), affecting patterns of global trade and finance.[] Whether these developments might
have consequences for the international monetary system, which is centred on the US dollar, is the
subject of intense debate.
Some observers have argued that sanctions imposed on Russia might have eroded confidence
among countries that are not geopolitically aligned with the United States in the safety of dollar
reserves and payment rails. Following the freezing of nearly half of the Russian central bank’s
reserves, some countries might reduce the insurance value they assign to foreign exchange reserves
if they fear facing sanctions in the future.[] Financial sanctions applied to foreign-owned US dollarThe international role of the euro, June 2023
1
2
3
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 2/17assets – it has been argued – reduce their usability and thereby liquidity.[] Some countries might then
be incentivised to diversify their reserves into non-traditional currencies, physical gold, or reduce their
level of exposure to foreign exchange reserves. Countries with strong trade relationships could be
inclined to collaborate and form fragmented currency blocs.[]
Anecdotal evidence, including official statements, points to the intention of some countries to
develop the use of alternatives to the currencies of countries that applied sanctions. The past
year has seen several announcements of new trade agreements to develop the use of local currencies
for trade invoicing, notably of commodities, and the potential creation of new common currencies, as
an alternative to the US dollar, the euro and other currencies of countries applying the sanctions
(Table A.1). Increasing use of non-traditional currencies in trade invoicing would in turn create
incentives to hold larger shares of foreign exchange reserves in non-traditional currencies in a positive
feedback loop.[] This could fragment the international monetary system along geopolitical lines.[]
The implications of a more fragmented international monetary system would be potentially
significant. For instance, recent research suggests that a 1% reduction in China’s US dollar reserves
could translate into an increase of five-year and ten-year yields of up to 25 basis points in the short
run.[] Furthermore, lower demand for foreign exchange reserves could contribute to increasing
exchange rate volatility.[]4
5
6 7
8
9
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 3/17By contrast, several economic arguments support, a priori, the resilience of the global role of
the US dollar to geopolitical shocks.[] First, sound institutions and macroeconomic fundamentals
– to which the United States and other major reserve currency issuers are committed – are essential
determinants of the currencies used as a global safe asset. Second, there is no obvious alternative to
deep and liquid financial markets in debt securities in US dollars, which are open to both domestic and
foreign investors. The international role of the Chinese renminbi has progressed but remains limited.
Limited capital account convertibility and limited exchange rate flexibility hinder the development of the
renminbi’s role which, to develop through trade, investment and policy support, requires continued
dollar backing (Box 1). Gold provides safety but is not remunerated and is supplied inelastically; it alsoTable A.1
Anecdotal evidence on the intentions of some countries to use alternative units to the
major international currencies
Overview of selected news and statements
Sources: Reuters, Bloomberg L.P ., Markets Insider , Central Banking and the Financial Times.
10
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 4/17needs to be stored domestically at a cost or face risks of remaining within the reach of sanctions.[]
Crypto-assets, either unbacked or presumably backed, such as stablecoins, remain too volatile and
opaque to qualify as reserve currency assets as the repeated crashes in crypto-asset markets
illustrate.[]
Geopolitical considerations could also favour the status quo. Recent research suggests that
approximately 50% to 60% of foreign-held US short-term assets are in the hands of governments with
strong geopolitical relations with the United States and are thus unlikely to be divested for geopolitical
reasons.[] Signalling effects are other factors: by accumulating foreign assets in sanctionable
currencies such as the US dollar and the euro, countries signal their commitment to international law
and good governance principles, which cement their credibility with foreign investors. Through this
channel, imposing sanctions on a country that breaks international law could in fact enhance the role
of currencies of major economies that are compliant with the sanctions.[]
2 Preliminary evidence on geopolitical fragmentation risks for
official reserve holdings
There is no significant evidence that geopolitical fragmentation risks have led to a reduction in
the level of demand for major reserve currencies. Admittedly, the stock of global foreign exchange
reserves declined in 2022, but this was largely driven by valuation effects and foreign exchange
interventions – and not the result of more limited appetite for foreign exchange reserves denominated
in the major currencies. Total allocated foreign exchange reserves increased from approximately USD
1.4 trillion in 1999 to USD 12.0 trillion in 2021, before declining by almost USD 1 trillion in 2022.
Valuation effects accounted for a large portion of this decline as bond prices fell and the major reserve
currencies depreciated against the US dollar (Box 3). Furthermore, exchange rate interventions by
central banks of a number of countries, such as Japan, Hong Kong, India and Singapore, resulted in
large sales of US dollars in exchange for domestic currency amid broad dollar strength in 2022.
In terms of composition of foreign exchange reserves, diversification into non-traditional
currencies continued in 2022, but at a slower pace compared with previous years. Since the
global financial crisis of 2007-09, reserve diversification into non-traditional reserve currencies, i.e. the
Chinese renminbi and currencies that are not part of the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket
has intensified.[] This shift reflects active portfolio diversification decisions by central bank reserve
managers in both emerging and advanced economy countries who, in a search for higher returns,
leverage on the growing liquidity of non-standard currencies.[] However, this trend has not
accelerated visibly since Russia invaded Ukraine. The share of non-SDR currencies increased in 2022
by 0.5 percentage points, a slower pace than in previous years (Chart A.1). The share of the Chinese
renminbi in global foreign exchange reserves remained stable.[]11
12
13
14
15
16
17
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 5/17The role of gold as a reserve asset has increased in the last decade. Amounts of gold held as
official reserve assets have increased steadily since the global financial crisis. Moreover, the share of
gold in total reserves has risen in the past decade to reach almost 13% of total reserves in 2022, close
to its 1999 peak (Chart A.2, panel a). Accumulation was mainly driven by emerging market
economies, possibly as a result of low yields on major reserve currencies and, therefore, lower
opportunity costs of holding unremunerated assets such as gold.[]
Gold accumulation by central banks increased noticeably in the wake of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine. According to estimates by the World Gold Council (WGC), 2022 saw the highest purchases
of gold by central banks on record (Chart A.2, panel b). The official numbers reported to the IMF,
however, paint a different picture. They indicate that the share of gold in global official reserves
increased by a modest 0.9 percentage points in 2022 and that gold held as reserve assets decreasedChart A.1
Diversification into non-traditional reserve currencies has not accelerated visibly since
Russia’ s invasion of Ukraine
Evolution of the share of the main reserve currencies and non-
traditional reserve currencies in total allocated foreign exchange
reserves
(percentages, at current exchange rates)
Sources: IMF and ECB calculations.
Notes: The main reserve currencies are the US dollar , the euro, the Japanese yen and the pound sterling.
Although COFER provides separate data on reserves held in the Australian dollar , Canadian dollar , Chinese
renminbi and the Swiss franc, Arslanalp et al. (2022) estimate that the remaining reserve currencies are the
Swedish krona, Norwegian krone, Danish krone, Korean won, Singapore dollar , New Zealand dollar and the Hong
Kong dollar . The share of non-SDR currencies comprises all currencies other than the main four currencies
mentioned above together with the Chinese renminbi, as the latter was added to the SDR basket in 2016. The first
vertical line from the left-hand side marks the introduction of the Chinese renminbi to the SDR basket, while the
second vertical line indicates the beginning of 2022.
18
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 6/17in volume. The difference can be explained by large amounts of “unreported purchases” by central
banks estimated by the WGC – which are not reported in official IMF figures.[] Among the reporting
countries, gold purchases were mainly from central banks in emerging markets. Türkiye was the
largest purchaser (with 148 tonnes), bringing its gold reserves to a record level. The People’s Bank of
China reported an increase in its gold reserves for the first time in three years and bought a total of 62
tonnes in the last two months of 2022. Other central banks that increased their gold holdings
significantly included India, Egypt, Qatar, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates and Oman.
3 Estimating the role of geopolitical factors in explaining
developments
Whether the recent geopolitical factors explain developments in official reserve portfolios
remains an open question that needs to be addressed. One way to identify the effect is to examine
to what extent cross-country developments depend on geopolitical alliances using an index of
geopolitical alignment with China-Russia versus the United States developed by ECB staff (Box A).19
Chart A.2
Central bank demand for gold hit a record high in 2022 according to some estimates
Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics, Metals Focus, Refinitiv GFMS and W orld Gold Council.
Notes: Panel a shows the volume of gold in fine troy ounces and the share of gold in total reserve assets of ficially
reported to the IMF . The share is calculated using gold at market prices and total reserve assets in US dollars,
using current exchange rates. Panel b shows the demand for gold by central banks and other institutions reported
by the W orld Gold Council, including estimates of unreported purchases.
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 7/17Box A
An index of geopolitical alignment
Prepared by Tamar den Besten, Paola Di Casola and Maurizio Michael Habib
This box details the construction of a new index of geopolitical alignment, which is used to
gauge whether geopolitics might be one of the factors explaining recent developments in the
composition of official reserve holdings. The index provides a summary assessment of the
closeness of a country to two spheres of geopolitical influence, one being the United States
and the other Russia and China.
The geopolitical index is based on four different proxies of political alignment between
countries, measured for the past decade. The first variable is the number of times a country
has been sanctioned by China and Russia minus the number of times it has been
sanctioned by the United States, using data from the Global Sanctions Database.[] This
database was used in related scholarly research linking historical patterns in the evolution of
the share of gold in foreign exchange reserves and sanctions.[] The second variable is the
share of military imports from Russia and China minus the share of imports from the United
States, obtained from the SIPRI Arms Transfers Database on bilateral military imports. TheChart A
Patterns of geopolitical alignments vary between advanced economies and
emerging market economies
Distribution of the geopolitical index for advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies
(x-axis: geopolitical index)
Sources: ECB calculations based on the Global Sanctions Database (GSDB), SIPRI Arms Transfers
Database, Green Finance & Development Center and the United Nations.
Notes: The boxplots show the distribution of the geopolitical index, including the minimum and
maximum values and the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles for each group of countries. A higher value of
the index indicates that a country is geopolitically closer to China and Russia than to the United States.
20
21
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 8/17third variable indicates whether a country participates in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) –
a Chinese-led project which was launched in 2013 with the initial aim of expanding trade
links between Asia, Africa and Europe, but is increasingly seen as a tool for projecting
China’s influence globally.[] The fourth variable is country voting on the resolution of the
Eleventh Emergency Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly adopted on
2 March 2022 on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, in the spirit of other studies that used data on
UN votes as a proxy for political alignment.[] Each variable is scaled and normalised to
vary from zero to one, and averaged out to create an index for which increasing values
indicate closer geopolitical alignment with China and Russia compared with the United
States.
Chart A reports the distribution of countries according to the index, split between advanced
economies and emerging or developing economies. Advanced economies tend to be more
closely aligned with the United States compared with China and Russia, unlike emerging
and developing economies. However, the geopolitical alignment of the latter economies is
more dispersed than that of advanced economies.
There is no evidence that diversification of official reserves into non-SDR currencies in the
review period was directly related to geopolitical considerations. Chart A.3, panel a plots the
changes in the share of non-SDR currencies in total foreign exchange reserves and the geopolitical
index for a restricted set of countries that actively diversified into non-SDR units in 2022.[] The lack of
correlation between the two variables is apparent from the chart. This suggests that the accumulation
of non-SDR currencies does not seem to be directly related to geopolitical factors.
By contrast, there are signs that geopolitical considerations were a motive behind
diversification into gold in 2022 in some cases. Chart A.3, panel b plots changes in the share of
gold in total reserve assets in 2022 against the geopolitical index for a restricted set of countries that
diversified actively into gold in that year.[] It is possible to identify a positive correlation between
these two variables.[] In other words, the closer countries are geopolitically to China and Russia
compared with the United States, the more they increased the share of gold in their official foreign
reserves – a pattern that was particularly apparent in Belarus and some central Asian economies.[]22
23
24
25
26
27
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 9/17Finally, China’s holdings of US Treasury securities significantly declined in 2022, reaching their
lowest level since 2010; nevertheless, it is not obvious to what extent this decrease was the
result of attempts to decouple from the dollar or of other factors. Chart A.4 plots the changes in
holdings of US Treasury securities for the 20 largest holders. As of January 2023, the holdings by
China declined by almost USD 200 billion or by around 10 percentage points relative to December
2021. Valuation effects owing to the fall in US bond prices may partly explain this large drop. Foreign
exchange interventions to stem the broad appreciation of the US dollar in the course of 2022 might be
another tentative explanation. The decline in the holdings of US Treasuries by Japan – the largest
holder, politically aligned with United States – is of a similar magnitude to that of China. In addition,
among the top holders of US Treasuries, there are no other countries that are geopolitically aligned
with Russia or China whose holdings of US Treasuries significantly declined.Chart A.3
Gold accumulators in 2022 tended to be geopolitically aligned with China and Russia
Sources: ECB calculations based on the Global Sanctions Database (GSDB), SIPRI Arms Transfers Database,
Green Finance & Development Center , the United Nations, W orld Gold Council and the IMF .
Notes: The scatterplot includes countries that increased the share of gold or non-SDR currencies in their of ficial
foreign reserves more than the average change across all countries. The share of gold in total reserves is
calculated using W orld Gold Council data. The geopolitical index measures the closeness of a country to the
country pair China-Russia versus the United States. A higher value of the index indicates that a country is closer
to China-Russia than to the United States. See Box A for further details on the construction of the index.
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 10/174 Preliminary evidence for other dimensions of international
currency use
Heightened geopolitical fragmentation risks could impact not only the composition of foreign
exchange reserves but also other dimensions of international currency use. The ban of selected
Russian banks from SWIFT – which was part of a package of sanctions imposed on Russia following
the invasion of Ukraine – has fuelled speculation that Russia and other countries that are not
geopolitically aligned with the United States could move their international payments to systems
alternative to SWIFT.[] One such alternative could be China’s cross-border interbank payment
system (CIPS), launched in 2015, which clears payments in renminbi, although volumes – at roughly
1% of those handled by the SWIFT system – remain small. Russia’s own alternative to SWIFT, the
System for Transfer of Financial Messages (SPFS), was developed in 2014 after Russia annexed the
Crimean Peninsula. Although the system has grown over the past year, with foreign participants
joining, its scope is still limited and it faces several challenges, such as higher transaction costs
compared with SWIFT. More generally, countries might seek to reduce their dependence on currencies
issued by sanctioning countries by reducing their cross-border payments in these currencies. There is
inconclusive evidence that this is happening, however. Chart A.5 shows how the shares of currencies
issued by countries that have not sanctioned Russia have marginally increased. However, the sharesChart A.4
There has been a large fall in the value of US Treasury securities held by China, but
also by Japan
Change in the holdings of US T reasury securities between December
2021 and January 2023
(USD billions and percentages)
Sources: US Treasury International Capital System and ECB calculations.
Note: The chart includes the 20 largest holders of US Treasury securities in December 2021.
28
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 11/17of currencies of most sanctioning countries, which are not shown in Chart A.5, such as the US dollar,
Japanese yen and pound sterling, also increased, with the exception of the euro. The share of the
rouble collapsed, reflecting the ban on Russian banks in the SWIFT system.
Anecdotal evidence, including official statements, pointing to the intention of some countries
to use alternative currencies for invoicing international trade was more ample in 2022. Press
reports published after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine provide additional anecdotal evidence about the
intentions of officials in Russia, China, India, Türkiye and Saudi Arabia to reduce the weight of the US
dollar and the euro in bilateral trade transactions, including commodities transactions, as shown in
Table A.1. Implementation is not without challenges, however. For example, press reports suggest that
after Russia requested Indian refineries to settle trade in Russian oil in United Arab Emirates dirhams
in July 2022, this did not occur until January 2023 as one intermediary bank declined to facilitate
transactions.[] Similarly, although the Reserve Bank of India applied a new mechanism to settle
international transactions in rupees in July 2022, press reports suggest that Russian counterparts
indicated that Indian banks have only used the system to a limited extent, owing to concerns about
secondary sanctions.[] Finally, recent research suggests that sanctions imposed on Russia at theChart A.5
The evidence on whether non-standard currencies are increasingly used in global
payments to avoid sanctions is inconclusive so far
Share of global payments in SWIFT of selected currencies, excluding
payments within the euro area
(percentages)
Sources: SWIFT  and ECB calculations.
Notes: The data refer to the currency shares of messages exchanged on SWIFT  in the total value of selected
currencies, excluding payments within the euro area. Data on the top 20 currency shares are available, meaning
that if a currency does not make this cut-of f point, the value of the currency will be zero in the chart.
29
30
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 12/17time of the annexation of Crimea in 2014 led to increases in trade invoicing in roubles at the expense
of US dollars in some cases.[] Additional evidence suggests that the share of Russia’s trade in goods
invoiced in roubles and in Chinese renminbi rose substantially in 2022, mainly at the expense of the
US dollar and the euro. In particular, the share of Russia’s trade invoiced in renminbi increased to 16%
in December 2022 from virtually zero just before the invasion of Ukraine (Chart A.6, panel a). In
parallel, use of the renminbi in cross-border payments by Russia increased sizeably – Russia was
among the top six countries for offshore renminbi payments in December 2022, with a share of almost
2% (Chart A.6, panel b).[] In the last quarter of 2022, the share of the renminbi in global trade
finance doubled to around 4% compared with the last quarter of the previous year.
Finally, there is scant evidence of diversification of private and official Russian investments
into cryptocurrencies, defying earlier speculation that these would be a pre-eminent conduit to
evade sanctions. In the immediate aftermath of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine observers speculated
that sanctions could usher in a diversification of private and official assets into cryptocurrencies as a
vehicle to circumvent the sanctions.[] Although Iran uses cryptocurrencies to pay for some of its31
32
Chart A.6
There is evidence of a stronger role of the Chinese renminbi in Russia’ s international
trade invoicing and cross-border payment patterns
Sources: Central Bank of Russia and SWIFT .
Notes: Panel b shows the share of Russia in total of fshore renminbi cross-border payments excluding China. In
January 2022 Russia was not in the top 15 countries for renminbi of fshore payment volumes and for this reason
its share is not reported by SWIFT . For that period Russia’ s share is approximated using the smallest share
reported by SWIFT .
33
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 13/17imports[], the size of Russia’s imports is too large in comparison with the liquidity of global
cryptocurrency markets.[] Nevertheless, as reported in Table A.1, Russia and Iran are discussing the
possibility of introducing a gold-backed stablecoin for foreign trade settlements, and the two countries
plan to link their interbank payment messaging systems after being disconnected from SWIFT.[]
5 Concluding remarks
So far, the geopolitical shock triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has not challenged the
conventional view that the global appeal of currencies is subject to substantial inertia effects,
which benefit incumbent currencies such as the US dollar and the euro. Evidence of
fragmentation risks materialising in the international monetary system remains so far mainly restricted
to announcements and specific cases – such as the invoicing of Russia’s international trade – rather
than pointing to broader trends. Evidence that some countries intend to develop the use of alternatives
to major traditional reserve currencies, notably for international trade, remains anecdotal. Apart from
significant gold accumulation in official reserve holdings, the available data do not point to substantial
changes in the international monetary system. Overall, Russia’s invasion has revealed the lack of
obvious alternatives to the major international currencies, at least in the near future.34
35
36
1.
See Aiyar, S. et al. (2023), “ ”, Staff
Discussion Note, No 2023/001, International Monetary Fund, Washington. See also ECB/ESCB
International Relations Committee Work stream on Open Strategic Autonomy (2023), “
”, European Central Bank, March.
2.
See C. Lagarde, (2022), “ ”, Speech
delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, April.
3.
One example is Russia, which cut its US dollar exposures significantly after the seizure of Crimea and
the imposition of international sanctions in 2014.
4.
See McDowell, D. (2021), “Financial sanctions and political risk in the international currency system”,
Review of International Political Economy, Vol. 28, No 3, pp. 635-661 and Bianchi, J. and Sosa-
Padilla, C. (2023), “International Sanctions and Dollar Dominance”, Working Paper, No 31024,
National Bureau of Economic Research for a model containing this channel.
5.
See the , 31 March 2022.
6.Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Future of Multilateralism
The EU’s Open
Strategic Autonomy from a central banking perspective
A new global map: European resilience in a changing world
 interview with Gita Gopinath in the Financial Times
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 14/17Gopinath, G. and Stein J.C. (2021), “ ”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 136, No 2, pp. 783-830.
7.
See , 5 February 2023.
8.
See Ahmed R. and Rebucci, A. (2022), “
”, Working Paper, No 30476, National Bureau of Economic Research, September.
9.
See Brunnermeier, M., James, H. and Landau, J.-P. (2022), “
”, VoxEU, April.
10.
See the discussion in Box 1 entitled “ ”,
, European Central Bank, June 2022.
11.
Gold held domestically is within the direct reach of foreign sanctions to a lesser extent and can only be
exchanged for domestic currency, thus nullifying its role as a reserve asset.
12.
For example, the crash of the algorithmic stablecoin TerraUSD in May 2022, the collapse of the
cryptocurrency exchange FTX in November 2022 or the de-pegging of the stablecoin USD Coin in
March 2023.
13.
Weiss, C. (2022), “ ”, International
Finance Discussion Papers, No 1359, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
14.
See Folkerts-Landau, D., Garber, P. and Dooley, M. (2022), “
”, VoxEU, May.
15.
Currencies that are part of the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights (SDR) basket are the US dollar, euro,
Japanese yen, pound sterling and the Chinese renminbi, the latter since October 2016. All other
reserve currencies are referred to as non-SDR currencies.
16.
See Arslanalp, S., Eichengreen, B. and Simpson-Bell, C. (2022), “
”, Journal of International Economics,
Vol. 138, No 103656, September.Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Dominant Currency
N. Roubini’s views in the Financial Times
Dollar Reserves and U.S. Yields: Identifying the Price Impact
of Official Flows
Sanctions and the international monetary
system
The Russian invasion of Ukraine and international currencies
The international role of the euro
Geopolitics and the U.S. Dollar's Future as a Reserve Currency
Seizures of foreign exchange reserves
will not weaken the dollar’s role as dominant reserve currency
The Stealth Erosion of Dollar
Dominance and the Rise of Nontraditional Reserve Currencies
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 15/1717.
Since in this special feature shares are reported at current exchange rates, valuation effects stemming
from the broad-based appreciation of the US dollar may be an additional explanation.
18.
See Arslanalp, S., Eichengreen, B. and Simpson-Bell, C. (2023), “
”, IMF Working Paper, No 2023/014, Washington, January.
19.
See World Gold Council (2023), “ ”, January. For example, the
Central Bank of Russia stopped reporting its gold purchases one month before the sanctions were
imposed, although it is expected to have been a large purchaser in 2022. Data are reported to the IMF
on a voluntary basis. The WGC complements IMF data with other proprietary data sources, such as
Metals Focus and Refinitiv GFMS metals research, to obtain estimates on gold purchases.
20.
Felbermayr, G., Kirilakha, A., Syropoulos, C., Yalcin, E. and Yotov, Y.V. (2020), “The Global Sanctions
Data Base”, European Economic Review, Vol. 129, October; Felbermayr, G., Kirilakha, A., Syropoulos,
C., Yalcin, E. and Yotov, Y.V. (2021), “The Global Sanctions Data Base: An Update that Includes the
Years of the Trump Presidency”, School of Economics Working Paper Series, No 2021-10, LeBow
College of Business, Drexel University; and Felbermayr, G., Kirilakha, A., Syropoulos, C., Yalcin E. and
Yotov, Y.V. (2022), “The Global Sanctions Data Base – Release 3: COVID-19, Russia, and Multilateral
Sanctions”, School of Economics Working Paper Series, No 2022-11, LeBow College of Business,
Drexel University.
21.
Arslanalp et al. (2023), op. cit.
22.
Bhattacharya, A., Dollar, D., Doshi, R., Hass, R., Jones, B., Kharas, H., Mason, J., Solis, M. and
Stromseth, J. (2019), “
”.
23.
The resolution deplored Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and demanded full withdrawal of Russian forces
and a reversal of Russia’s decision to recognise the self-proclaimed “people’s republics” of Donetsk
and Luhansk. See, for example, Dreher, A., Fuchs, A., Parks, B., Strange, A. and Tierney, M.J. (2021),
“ ”, American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 13, No 2, pp. 135-174, May.
24.Gold as International Reserves: A
Barbarous Relic No More?
Gold Demand Trends Full Year 2022
China’s Belt and Road: The New Geopolitics of Global Infrastructure
Development; A Brookings Interview
Aid, China, and Growth: Evidence from a New Global Development Finance Dataset
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 16/17Active diversifiers are countries with above-average increases in the share in question, in the spirit of
Arslanalp et al. (2022 and 2023), op. cit.
25.
Active diversifiers are countries with above-average increases in the share of gold.
26.
This positive coefficient is statistically significant and robust to outliers. Robustness checks show that
constructing the geopolitical alignment index with respect to China versus the United States or with
respect to Russia versus the United States, as separate dependent variables, produces similar results.
Finally, the results are also robust to the inclusion of inflation in 2022 as an additional control variable.
27.
For instance, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. These countries, together with Belarus, have
been identified as geopolitically close to Russia in a  (March
2023).
28.
SWIFT is a global messaging network through which international payments between banks are
conducted.
29.
See “ ”, Reuters, September 2022.
30.
See .
31.
The evidence is available for French firms (see Berthou, A. (2023), “
”, mimeo).
32.
As of March 2023, Hong Kong accounts for the bulk of renminbi offshore payments (73% of total
payments excluding China) as reported by SWIFT. In the ranking of major centres for offshore
renminbi payments, Russia holds fifth place after the United Kingdom, Singapore and the United
States.
33.
See .
34.
See .
35.similar index developed by The Economist
Indian refiners pay dollars for Russian oil after dirham attempts fail
news article on concerns at Indian banks surrounding US sanctions
International sanctions and the
dollar: Evidence from trade invoicing
news report speculating that Russia could use cryptocurrencies to evade sanctions
news report on Iran using cryptocurrency to pay for imports
11/3/24, 16:07 Geopolitical fragmentation risks and international currencies
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ire/article/html/ecb.ireart202306_01~11d437be4d.en.html#toc5 17/17Copyright 2024, European Central BankSee the 
. See also Ahari, A., Duong, J., Hanzl, J., Lichtenegger,
E.M., Lobnik, L. and Timel, A. (2022) “
”, OeNB Focus on European Economic Integration Q4/22, Oesterreichische Nationalbank,
December.
36.
There is evidence that the Russian private sector faced challenges in finding alternatives to the
western financial system to park assets for the first half of 2022. A recent study found that Russian
firms had accumulated approximately USD 100 billion in foreign assets up to June 2022 and that the
bulk of these funds were located in sanctioning jurisdictions (see Cocozza, E., Corneli, F., Della Corte,
V. and Savini Zangrandi, M. (2023), “ ”, VoxEU, January.Center for Strategic and International Studies Q&A on the implications for Russia regarding
cryptocurrencies and US sanctions evasion
Is it easy to hide money in the crypto economy? The case of
Russia
In search of Russia’s foreign assets
